   if you be here today — and I be very happy that you be — you 've all hear about how sustainable development will save we from ourselves . however , when we be not at ted , we be often tell that a real sustainability policy agenda be just not feasible , especially in large urban area like new york city . and that be because most people with decision - make power , in both the public and the private sector , really do not feel as though they be in danger .     the reason why I be here today , in part , be because of a dog — an abandon puppy I find back in the rain , back in 1998 . she turn out to be a much big dog than I would anticipate . when she come into my life , we be fight against a huge waste facility plan for the east river waterfront despite the fact that our small part of new york city already handle more than 40 percent of the entire city 's commercial waste : a sewage treatment pelletize plant , a sewage sludge plant , four power plant , the world 's large food - distribution center , as well as other industry that bring more than 60,000 diesel truck trip to the area each week . the area also have one of the low ratio of park to people in the city .     so when I be contact by the park department about a $ 10,000 seed - grant initiative to help develop waterfront project , I think they be really well - meaning , but a bit naive . I have live in this area all my life , and you could not get to the river , because of all the lovely facility that I mention early . then , while jog with my dog one morning , she pull I into what I think be just another illegal dump . there be weed and pile of garbage and other stuff that I will not mention here , but she keep drag I , and lo and behold , at the end of that lot be the river . I know that this forget little street - end , abandon like the dog that bring I there , be worth save . and I know it would grow to become the proud beginning of the community - lead revitalization of the new south bronx .     and just like my new dog , it be an idea that get big than I would imagine . we garner much support along the way , and the hunt point riverside park become the first waterfront park that the south bronx have have in more than 60 year . we leverage that $ 10,000 seed grant more than 300 time , into a $ 3 million park .     and in the fall , I be go to exchange marriage vow with my beloved .     ( audience whistle )     thank you very much .     ( applause )     that be he press my button back there , which he do all the time .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     but those of we live in environmental justice community be the canary in the coal mine . we feel the problem right now , and have for some time . environmental justice , for those of you who may not be familiar with the term , go something like this : no community should be saddle with more environmental burden and less environmental benefit than any other .     unfortunately , race and class be extremely reliable indicator as to where one might find the good stuff , like park and tree , and where one might find the bad stuff , like power plant and waste facility . as a black person in america , I be twice as likely as a white person to live in an area where air pollution pose the great risk to my health . I be five time more likely to live within walk distance of a power plant or chemical facility , which I do . these land - use decision create the hostile condition that lead to problem like obesity , diabetes and asthma . why would someone leave their home to go for a brisk walk in a toxic neighborhood ? our 27 percent obesity rate be high even for this country , and diabetes come with it . one out of four south bronx child have asthma . our asthma hospitalization rate be seven time high than the national average . these impact be come everyone 's way . and we all pay dearly for solid waste cost , health problem associate with pollution and more odiously , the cost of imprison our young black and latino man , who possess untold amount of untapped potential . fifty percent of our resident live at or below the poverty line ; 25 percent of we be unemployed . low - income citizen often use emergency - room visit as primary care . this come at a high cost to taxpayer and produce no proportional benefit . poor people be not only still poor , they be still unhealthy .     fortunately , there be many people like I who be strive for solution that will not compromise the life of low - income community of color in the short term , and will not destroy we all in the long term . none of we want that , and we all have that in common . so what else do we have in common ?     well , first of all , we be all incredibly good - look .     ( laughter )     graduate high school , college , post - graduate degree , travel to interesting place , do not have kid in your early teen , financially stable , never be imprison . ok . good .     ( laughter )     but , besides be a black woman , I be different from most of you in some other way . I watch nearly half of the building in my neighborhood burn down . my big brother lenny fight in vietnam , only to be gun down a few block from our home . jesus . I grow up with a crack house across the street . yeah , I be a poor black child from the ghetto . these thing make I different from you . but the thing we have in common set I apart from most of the people in my community , and I be in between these two world with enough of my heart to fight for justice in the other .     so how do thing get so different for we ? in the late ' 40 , my dad — a pullman porter , son of a slave — buy a house in the hunt point section of the south bronx , and a few year later , he marry my mom . at the time , the community be a mostly white , working - class neighborhood . my dad be not alone . and as other like he pursue their own version of the american dream , white flight become common in the south bronx and in many city around the country . red - lining be use by bank , wherein certain section of the city , include ours , be deem off - limit to any sort of investment . many landlord believe it be more profitable to torch their building and collect insurance money rather than to sell under those condition — dead or injure former tenant notwithstanding .     hunt point be formerly a walk - to - work community , but now resident have neither work nor home to walk to . a national highway construction boom be add to our problem . in new york state , robert moses spearhead an aggressive highway - expansion campaign . one of its primary goal be to make it easy for resident of wealthy community in westchester county to go to manhattan . the south bronx , which lie in between , do not stand a chance . resident be often give less than a month 's notice before their building be raze . 600,000 people be displace . the common perception be that only pimp and pusher and prostitute be from the south bronx . and if you be tell from your early day that nothing good be go to come from your community , that it be bad and ugly , how could it not reflect on you ? so now , my family 's property be worthless , save for that it be our home , and all we have . and luckily for I , that home and the love inside of it , along with help from teacher , mentor and friend along the way , be enough .     now , why be this story important ? because from a planning perspective , economic degradation beget environmental degradation , which beget social degradation . the disinvestment that begin in the 1960s set the stage for all the environmental injustice that be to come . antiquated zoning and land - use regulation be still use to this day to continue put pollute facility in my neighborhood . be these factor take into consideration when land - use policy be decide ? what cost be associate with these decision ? and who pay ? who profit ? do anything justify what the local community go through ? this be " plan " — in quote — that do not have our good interest in mind .     once we realize that , we decide it be time to do our own planning . that small park I tell you about early be the first stage of build a greenway movement in the south bronx . I write a one - and - a - quarter - million dollar federal transportation grant to design the plan for a waterfront esplanade with dedicated on - street bike path . physical improvement help inform public policy regard traffic safety , the placement of the waste and other facility , which , if do properly , do not compromise a community 's quality of life . they provide opportunity to be more physically active , as well as local economic development . think bike shop , juice stand . we secure 20 million dollar to build first - phase project . this be lafayette avenue — and that be redesign by mathew nielsen landscape architect . and once this path be construct , it 'll connect the south bronx with more than 400 acre of randall 's island park . right now we be separate by about 25 foot of water , but this link will change that .     as we nurture the natural environment , its abundance will give we back even more . we run a project call the bronx [ environmental ] stewardship training , which provide job training in the field of ecological restoration , so that folk from our community have the skill to compete for these well - pay job . little by little , we be seed the area with green - collar job — and with people that have both a financial and personal stake in their environment . the sheridan expressway be an underutilize relic of the robert moses era , build with no regard for the neighborhood that be divide by it . even during rush hour , it go virtually unused . the community create an alternative transportation plan that allow for the removal of the highway . we have the opportunity now to bring together all the stakeholder to re - envision how this 28 acre can be well utilize for parkland , affordable housing and local economic development .     we also build new york city 's first green and cool roof demonstration project on top of our office . cool roof be highly - reflective surface that do not absorb solar heat , and pass it on to the building or atmosphere . green roof be soil and living plant . both can be use instead of petroleum - base roofing material that absorb heat , contribute to urban " heat island " effect and degrade under the sun , which we in turn breathe . green roof also retain up to 75 percent of rainfall , so they reduce a city 's need to fund costly end - of - pipe solution — which , incidentally , be often locate in environmental justice community like mine . and they provide habitat for our little friend !     [ butterfly ]     ( laughter )     so cool !     anyway , the demonstration project be a springboard for our own green roof installation business , bring job and sustainable economic activity to the south bronx .     [ green be the new black ... ]     ( laughter ) ( applause )     I like that , too .     anyway , I know chris tell we not to do pitch up here , but since I have all of your attention : we need investor . end of pitch . it be well to ask for forgiveness than permission . anyway —     ( laughter )     ( applause )     ok . katrina .     prior to katrina , the south bronx and new orleans ' ninth ward have a lot in common . both be largely populate by poor people of color , both hotbed of cultural innovation : think hip - hop and jazz . both be waterfront community that host both industry and resident in close proximity of one another . in the post - katrina era , we have still more in common . we be at well ignore , and malign and abuse , at bad , by negligent regulatory agency , pernicious zoning and lax governmental accountability . neither the destruction of the ninth ward nor the south bronx be inevitable . but we have emerge with valuable lesson about how to dig ourselves out . we be more than simply national symbol of urban blight or problem to be solve by empty campaign promise of president come and go . now will we let the gulf coast languish for a decade or two , like the south bronx do ? or will we take proactive step and learn from the homegrown resource of grassroots activist that have be bear of desperation in community like mine ?     now listen , I do not expect individual , corporation or government to make the world a well place because it be right or moral . this presentation today only represent some of what I 've be through . like a tiny little bit . you 've no clue . but I 'll tell you later , if you want to know .     ( laughter )     but — I know it be the bottom line , or one 's perception of it , that motivate people in the end . I be interested in what I like to call the " triple bottom line " that sustainable development can produce . development that have the potential to create positive return for all concerned : the developer , government and the community where these project go up .     at present , that be not happen in new york city . and we be operate with a comprehensive urban - planning deficit . a parade of government subsidy be go to propose big - box and stadium development in the south bronx , but there be scant coordination between city agency on how to deal with the cumulative effect of increase traffic , pollution , solid waste and the impact on open space . and their approach to local economic and job development be so lame it be not even funny . because on top of that , the world 's rich sport team be replace the house that ruth build by destroy two well - love community park . now , we 'll have even less than that stat I tell you about early . and although less than 25 percent of south bronx resident own car , these project include thousand of new parking space , yet zip in term of mass public transit . now , what be miss from the large debate be a comprehensive cost - benefit analysis between not fix an unhealthy , environmentally - challenge community , versus incorporate structural , sustainable change . my agency be work closely with columbia university and other to shine a light on these issue .     now let us get this straight : I be not anti - development . ours be a city , not a wilderness preserve . and I 've embrace my inner capitalist . and , but I do not have —     ( laughter )     you you all have , and if you have not , you need to .     ( laughter )     so I do not have a problem with developer make money . there be enough precedent out there to show that a sustainable , community - friendly development can still make a fortune . fellow tedster bill mcdonough and amory lovin — both hero of mine by the way — have show that you can actually do that . I do have a problem with development that hyper - exploit politically vulnerable community for profit . that it continue be a shame upon we all , because we be all responsible for the future that we create . but one of the thing I do to remind myself of great possibility , be to learn from visionary in other city . this be my version of globalization .     let us take bogota . poor , latino , surround by runaway gun violence and drug trafficking ; a reputation not unlike that of the south bronx . however , this city be bless in the late 1990 with a highly - influential mayor name enrique peñalosa . he look at the demographic . few bogotano own car , yet a huge portion of the city 's resource be dedicate to serve they . if you be a mayor , you can do something about that . his administration narrow key municipal thoroughfare from five lane to three , outlaw parking on those street , expand pedestrian walkway and bike lane , create public plazas , create one of the most efficient bus mass - transit system in the entire world . for his brilliant effort , he be nearly impeach . but as people begin to see that they be be put first on issue reflect their day - to - day life , incredible thing happen . people stop litter . crime rate drop , because the street be alive with people . his administration attack several typical urban problem at one time , and on a third - world budget , at that . we have no excuse in this country , I be sorry . but the bottom line be : their people - first agenda be not mean to penalize those who could actually afford car , but rather , to provide opportunity for all bogotano to participate in the city 's resurgence . that development should not come at the expense of the majority of the population be still consider a radical idea here in the u.s . but bogota 's example have the power to change that .     you , however , be bless with the gift of influence . that be why you be here and why you value the information we exchange . use your influence in support of comprehensive , sustainable change everywhere . do not just talk about it at ted . this be a nationwide policy agenda I be try to build , and as you all know , politic be personal . help I make green the new black . help I make sustainability sexy . make it a part of your dinner and cocktail conversation . help I fight for environmental and economic justice . support investment with a triple - bottom - line return . help I democratize sustainability by bring everyone to the table , and insist that comprehensive planning can be address everywhere . oh good , glad I have a little more time !     listen — when I speak to mr . gore the other day after breakfast , I ask he how environmental justice activist be go to be include in his new marketing strategy . his response be a grant program . I do not think he understand that I be not ask for funding . I be make he an offer .     ( applause )     what trouble I be that this top - down approach be still around . now , do not get I wrong , we need money .     ( laughter )     but grassroots group be need at the table during the decision - making process . of the 90 percent of the energy that mr . gore remind we that we waste every day , do not add waste our energy , intelligence and hard - earn experience to that count .     ( applause )     I have come from so far to meet you like this . please do not waste I . by work together , we can become one of those small , rapidly - grow group of individual who actually have the audacity and courage to believe that we actually can change the world . we might have come to this conference from very , very different station in life , but believe I , we all share one incredibly powerful thing . we have nothing to lose and everything to gain .     ciao , bellos !     ( applause )  
   on september 10 , the morning of my seventh birthday , I come downstairs to the kitchen , where my mother be wash the dish and my father be read the paper or something , and I sort of present myself to they in the doorway , and they say , " hey , happy birthday ! " and I say , " I be seven . " and my father smile and say , " well , you know what that mean , do not you ? " and I say , " yeah , that I be go to have a party and a cake and get a lot of present ? " and my dad say , " well , yes . but more importantly , be seven mean that you 've reach the age of reason , and you be now capable of commit any and all sin against god and man . "     ( laughter )     now , I have hear this phrase , " age of reason , " before . sister mary kevin have be bandy it about my second - grade class at school . but when she say it , the phrase seem all catch up in the excitement of preparation for our first communion and our first confession , and everybody know that be you all about the white dress and the white veil . and anyway , I have not really pay all that much attention to that phrase , " age of reason . " so , I say , " yeah , yeah , age of reason . what do that mean again ? " and my dad say , " well , we believe , in the catholic church , that god know that little kid do not know the difference between right and wrong , but when you be seven , you be old enough to know well . so , you 've grow up and reach the age of reason , and now god will start keep note on you , and begin your permanent record . "     ( laughter )     and I say , " oh ... wait a minute . you mean all that time , up till today , all that time I be so good , god do not notice it ? " and my mom say , " well , I notice it . "     ( laughter )     and I think , " how could I not have know this before ? how could it not have sink in when they have be tell I ? all that be good and no real credit for it . and bad of all , how could I not have realize this very important information until the very day that it be basically useless to I ? " so I say , " well , mom and dad , what about santa claus ? I mean , santa claus know if you be naughty or nice , right ? " and my dad say , " yeah , but , honey , I think that be technically just between thanksgiving and christmas . " and my mother say , " oh , bob , stop it . let us just tell she . I mean , she be seven . julie , there be no santa claus . "     ( laughter )     now , this be actually not that upset to I . my parent have this whole elaborate story about santa claus : how they have talk to santa claus himself and agree that instead of santa deliver our present over the night of christmas eve , like he do for every other family who get to open their surprise first thing christmas morning , our family would give santa more time . santa would come to our house while we be at nine o'clock high mass on christmas morning , but only if all of we kid do not make a fuss . which make I very suspicious . it be pretty obvious that it be really our parent give we the present . I mean , my dad have a very distinctive wrapping style , and my mother 's handwriting be so close to santa 's .     ( laughter )     plus , why would santa save time by have to loop back to our house after he have go to everybody else 's ? there be only one obvious conclusion to reach from this mountain of evidence : our family be too strange and weird for even santa claus to come visit , and my poor parent be try to protect we from the embarrassment , this humiliation of rejection by santa , who be jolly — but let us face it , he be also very judgmental . so to find out that there be no santa claus at all be actually sort of a relief .     I leave the kitchen not really in shock about santa , but rather , I be just dumbfound about how I could have miss this whole age of reason thing . it be too late for I , but maybe I could help someone else , someone who could use the information . they have to fit two criterion : they have to be old enough to be able to understand the whole concept of the age of reason , and not yet seven . the answer be clear : my brother bill . he be six . well , I finally find bill about a block away from our house at this public school playground . it be a saturday , and he be all by himself , just kick a ball against the side of a wall . I run up to he and say , " bill ! I just realize that the age of reason start when you turn seven , and then you be capable of commit any and all sin against god and man . " and bill say , " so ? " and I say , " so , you be six . you have a whole year to do anything you want to and god will not notice it . " and he say , " so ? " and I say , " so ? so everything ! " and I turn to run . I be so angry with he . but when I get to the top of the step , I turn around dramatically and say , " oh , by the way , bill — there be no santa claus . "     ( laughter )     now , I do not know it at the time , but I really be not turn seven on september 10th . for my 13th birthday , I plan a slumber party with all of my girlfriend , but a couple of week beforehand my mother take I aside and say , " I need to speak to you privately . september 10th be not your birthday . it be october 10th . " and I say , " what ? "     ( laughter )     and she say ...     ( laughter )     " listen . the cut - off date to start kindergarten be september 15th . "     ( laughter )     " so I tell they that your birthday be september 10th , and then I be not sure that you be not just go to go blab it all over the place , so I start to tell you your birthday be september 10th . but , julie , you be so ready to start school , honey . you be so ready . " I think about it , and when I be four , I be already the old of four child , and my mother even have another child to come , so what I think she — understandably — really mean be that she be so ready , she be so ready . then she say , " do not worry , julie . every year on october 10th , when it be your birthday but you do not realize it , I make sure that you eat a piece of cake that day . "     ( laughter )     which be comforting , but troubling . my mother have be celebrate my birthday with I , without I .     ( laughter )     what be so upsetting about this new piece of information be not that I have to change the date of my slumber party with all of my girlfriend . what be most upsetting be that this mean I be not a virgo . I have a huge virgo poster in my bedroom . and I read my horoscope every single day , and it be so totally I .     ( laughter )     and this mean that I be a libra ? so , I take the bus downtown to get the new libra poster . the virgo poster be a picture of a beautiful woman with long hair , sort of lounge by some water , but the libra poster be just a huge scale . this be around the time that I start fill out physically , and I be fill out a lot more than a lot of the other girl , and frankly , the whole idea that my astrological sign be a scale just seem ominous and depressing .     ( laughter )     but I get the new libra poster , and I start to read my new libra horoscope , and I be astonish to find that it be also totally I .     ( laughter )     it be not until year later , look back on this whole age - of - reason , change - of - birthday thing , that it dawn on I : I be not turn seven when I think I turn seven . I have a whole other month to do anything I want to before god start keep tab on I . oh , life can be so cruel . one day , two mormon missionary come to my door . now , I just live off a main thoroughfare in los angeles , and my block be — well , it be a natural beginning for people who be peddle thing door to door . sometimes I get little old lady from the seventh day adventist church show I these cartoon picture of heaven . and sometimes I get teenager who promise I that they will not join a gang and just start rob people , if I only buy some magazine subscription from they . so normally , I just ignore the doorbell , but on this day , I answer . and there stand two boy , each about 19 , in white , starched short - sleeve shirt , and they have little name tag that identify they as official representative of the church of jesus christ of latter - day saint , and they say they have a message for I , from god . I say , " a message for I ? from god ? " and they say , " yes . " now , I be raise in the pacific northwest , around a lot of church of latter - day saint people and , you know , I 've work with they and even date they , but I never really know the doctrine , or what they say to people when they be out on a mission , and I guess I be sort of curious , so I say , " well , please , come in . " and they look really happy , because I do not think this happen to they all that often .     ( laughter )     and I sit they down , and I get they glass of water — ok , I get it , I get it . I get they glass of water . do not touch my hair , that be the thing .     ( laughter )     you can not put a video of myself in front of I and expect I not to fix my hair . ok .     ( laughter )     so I sit they down and I get they glass of water , and after nicety , they say , " do you believe that god love you with all his heart ? " and I think , " well , of course I believe in god , but you know , I do not like that word ' heart , ' because it anthropomorphize god , and I do not like the word , ' his , ' either , because that sexualize god . " but I do not want to argue semantic with these boy , so after a very long , uncomfortable pause , I say , " yes , yes , I do . I feel very loved . " and they look at each other and smile , like that be the right answer . and then they say , " do you believe that we be all brother and sister on this planet ? " and I say , " yes , I do . " and I be so relieved that it be a question I could answer so quickly . and they say , " well , then we have a story to tell you . "     and they tell I this you all about this guy name lehi , who live in jerusalem in 600 bc . now , apparently in jerusalem in 600 bc , everyone be completely bad and evil . every single one of they : man , woman , child , infant , fetus . and god come to lehi and say to he , " put your family on a boat and I will lead you out of here . " and god do lead they . he lead they to america . I say , " america ?     ( laughter )     from jerusalem to america by boat in 600 bc ? " and they say , " yes . "     ( laughter )     then they tell I how lehi and his descendant reproduce and reproduce , and over the course of 600 year , there be two great race of they , the nephite and the lamanite , and the nephite be totally good — each and every one of they — and the lamanite be totally bad and evil — every single one of they just bad to the bone .     then , after jesus die on the cross for our sin , on his way up to heaven , he stop by america and visit the nephite .     ( laughter )     and he tell they that if you all remain totally , totally good — each and every one of they — they would win the war against the evil lamanite . but apparently somebody blow it , because the lamanite be able to kill all the nephite . all but one guy , this guy name mormon , who manage to survive by hide in the wood . and he make sure this whole story be write down in reform egyptian hieroglyphic chisel onto gold plate , which he then bury near palmyra , new york .     ( laughter )     well , I be just on the edge of my seat .     ( laughter )     I say , " what happen to the lamanite ? " and they say , " well , they become our native american , here in the u.s . " and I say , " so , you believe the native americans be descend from a people who be totally evil ? " and they say , " yes . " then they tell I how this guy name joseph smith find those bury gold plate right in his backyard , and he also find this magic stone back there that he put into his hat and then bury his face into , and this allow he to translate the gold plate from the reform egyptian into english .     well , at this point I just want to give these two boy some advice about their pitch .     ( laughter )     I want to say —     ( applause )     " ok , do not start with this story . "     ( laughter )     I mean , even the scientologist know to start with a personality test before they start —     ( applause )     tell people all about xenu , the evil intergalactic overlord . then , they say , " do you believe that god speak to we through his righteous prophet ? " and I say , " no , I do not , " because I be sort of upset about this lamanite story and this crazy gold plate story , but the truth be , I have not really think this through , so I backpedal a little and I say , " well , what exactly do you mean by ' righteous ' ? and what do you mean by prophet ? like , could the prophet be woman ? " and they say , " no . " and I say , " why ? " and they say , " well , it be because god give woman a gift that be so spectacular , it be so wonderful , that the only gift he have leave over to give man be the gift of prophecy . " what be this wonderful gift god give woman , I wonder ? maybe their great ability to cooperate and adapt ?     ( laughter )     woman 's long lifespan ? the fact that woman tend to be much less violent than man ? but no — it be not any of these gift . they say , " well , it be her ability to bear child . " I say , " oh , come on . I mean , even if woman try to have a baby every single year from the time they be 15 to the time they be 45 , assume they do not die from exhaustion , it still seem like some woman would have some time leave over to hear the word of god . " and they say , " no . "     ( laughter )     well , then they do not look so fresh - faced and cute to I any more , but they have more to say . they say , " well , we also believe that if you be a mormon , and if you be in good standing with the church , when you die , you get to go to heaven and be with your family for all eternity . " and I say , " oh , dear .     ( laughter )     that would not be such a good incentive for I . "     ( laughter )     and they say , " oh .     ( laughter )     hey ! well , we also believe that when you go to heaven , you get your body restore to you in its good original state . like , if you have lose a leg , well , you get it back . or , if you would go blind , you could see . " I say , " oh . now , I do not have a uterus , because I have cancer a few year ago . so do this mean that if I go to heaven , I would get my old uterus back ? " and they say , " sure . " and I say , " I do not want it back . I be happy without it . " gosh . what if you have a nose job and you like it ?     ( laughter )     would god force you to get your old nose back ? then they give I this book of mormon , tell I to read this chapter and that chapter , and say they would come back and check in on I , and I think I say something like , " please do not hurry , " or maybe just , " please do not , " and they be go .     ok , so I initially feel really superior to these boy , and smug in my more conventional faith . but then the more I think about it , the more I have to be honest with myself . if someone come to my door and I be hear catholic theology and dogma for the very first time , and they say , " we believe that god impregnate a very young girl without the use of intercourse , and the fact that she be a virgin be maniacally important to we . "     ( laughter )     " and she have a baby , and that be the son of god , " I mean , I would think that be equally ridiculous . I be just so use to that story .     ( laughter )     so , I could not let myself feel condescend towards these boy . but the question they ask I when they first arrive really stuck in my head : do I believe that god love I with all his heart ? because I be not exactly sure how I feel about that question . now , if they have ask I , " do you feel that god love you with all his heart ? " well , that would have be much different , I think I would have instantly answer , " yes , yes , I feel it all the time . I feel god 's love when I be hurt and confuse , and I feel consoled and care for . I take shelter in god 's love when I do not understand why tragedy hit , and I feel god 's love when I look with gratitude at all the beauty I see . " but since they ask I that question with the word " believe " in it , somehow it be all different , because I be not exactly sure if I believe what I so clearly feel .  
   I can not help but this wish : to think about when you be a little kid , and all your friend ask you , " if a genie could give you one wish in the world , what would it be ? " and I always answer , " well , I would want the wish to have the wisdom to know exactly what to wish for . " well , then you would be screw , because you would know what to wish for , and you would use up your wish , and now , since we only have one wish — unlike last year they have three wish — I be not go to wish for that .     so let us get to what I would like , which be world peace . and I know what you be think : you be think , " the poor girl up there , she think she be at a beauty pageant . she be not . she be at the ted prize . " ( laughter ) but I really do think it make sense . and I think that the first step to world peace be for people to meet each other . I 've meet a lot of different people over the year , and I 've film some of they , from a dotcom executive in new york who want to take over the world , to a military press officer in qatar , who would rather not take over the world . if you 've see the film " control room " that be send out , you would understand a little bit why . ( applause ) thank you . wow ! some of you watch it . that be great . that be great .     so basically what I would like to talk about today be a way for people to travel , to meet people in a different way than — because you can not travel all over the world at the same time . and a long time ago — well , about 40 year ago — my mom have an exchange student . and I be go to show you slide of the exchange student . this be donna . this be donna at the statue of liberty . this be my mother and aunt teaching donna how to ride a bike . this be donna eat ice cream . and this be donna teach my aunt how to do a filipino dance . I really think as the world be get small , it become more and more important that we learn each other 's dance move , that we meet each other , we get to know each other , we be able to figure out a way to cross border , to understand each other , to understand people 's hope and dream , what make they laugh and cry . and I know that we can not all do exchange program , and I can not force everybody to travel ; I 've already talk about that to chris and amy , and they say that there be a problem with this : you can not force people , free will . and I totally support that , so we be not force people to travel . but I would like to talk about another way to travel that do not require a ship or an airplane , and just require a movie camera , a projector and a screen . and that be what I be go to talk to you about today .     I be ask that I speak a little bit about where I personally come from , and cameron , I do not know how you manage to get out of that one , but I think that build bridge be important to I because of where I come from . I be the daughter of an american mother and an egyptian - lebanese - syrian father . so I be the live product of two culture come together . no pun intend . ( laughter ) and I 've also be call , as an egyptian - lebanese - syrian american with a persian name , the " middle east peace crisis . "     so maybe I start to take picture be some kind of way to bring both side of my family together — a way to take the world with I , a way to tell story visually . it all kind of start that way , but I think that I really realize the power of the image when I first go to the garbage - collect village in egypt , when I be about 16 . my mother take I there . she be somebody who believe strongly in community service , and decide that this be something that I need to do . and so I go there and I meet some amazing woman there . there be a center there , where they be teach people how to read and write , and get vaccination against the many disease you can get from sort through garbage . and I begin teach there . I teach english , and I meet some incredible woman there . I meet people that live seven people to a room , barely can afford their evening meal , yet live with this strength of spirit and sense of humor and just incredible quality .     I got draw into this community and I begin to take picture there . I take picture of wedding and old family member — thing that they want memory of . about two year after I start take these picture , the un conference on population and development ask I to show they at the conference . so I be 18 ; I be very excited . it be my first exhibit of photograph and they be all put up there , and after about two day , you all come down except for three . people be very upset , very angry that I be show these dirty side of cairo , and why do not I cut the dead donkey out of the frame ? and as I sit there , I get very depressed . I look at this big empty wall with three lonely photograph that be , you know , very pretty photograph and I be like , " I fail at this . " but I be look at this intense emotion and intense feeling that have come out of people just see these photograph . here I be , this 18 - year - old pipsqueak that nobody listen to , and all of a sudden , I put these photograph on the wall , and there be argument , and they have to be take down . and I see the power of the image , and it be incredible . and I think the most important reaction that I see there be actually from people that would never have go to the garbage village themselves , that would never have see that the human spirit could thrive in such difficult circumstance . and I think it be at that point that I decide I want to use photography and film to somehow bridge gap , to bridge culture , bring people together , cross border . and so that be what really kind of start I off .     do a stint at mtv , make a film call " startup.com , " and I 've do a couple of music film . but in 2003 , when the war in iraq be about to start , it be a very surreal feeling for I , because before the war start , there be kind of this medium war that be go on . and I be watch television in new york , and there seem to be just one point of view that be come across , and the coverage go from the us state department to embed troop . and what be come across on the news be that there be go to be this clean war and precision bombing , and the iraqis would be greet the americans as liberator , and throw flower at their foot in the street of baghdad . and I know that there be a completely other story that be take place in the middle east , where my parent be . I know that there be a completely other story be tell , and I be think , " how be people suppose to communicate with each other when they be get completely different message , and nobody know what the other 's be tell ? how be people suppose to have any kind of common understanding or know how to move together into the future ? so I know that I have to go there . I just want to be in the center . I have no plan . I have no funding . I do not even have a camera at the time — I have somebody bring it there , because I want to get access to al jazeera , george bush 's favorite channel , and a place which I be very curious about because it be dislike by many government across the arab world , and also call the mouthpiece of osama bin laden by some people in the us government .     so I be think , this station that be hate by so many people have to be do something right . I 've get to go see what this be all about . and I also want to go see central command , which be 10 minute away . and that way , I could get access to how this news be be create — on the arab side , reach the arab world , and on the us and western side , reach the us .     and when I go there and sit there , and meet these people that be in the center of it , and sit with these character , I meet some surprising , very complex people . and I would like to share with you a little bit of that experience of when you sit with somebody and you film they , and you listen to they , and you allow they more than a five - second sound bite . the amazing complexity of people emerge .     samir khader : business as usual . iraq , and then iraq , and then iraq . but between we , if I be offer a job with fox , I 'll take it . to change the arab nightmare into the american dream . I still have that dream . maybe I will never be able to do it , but I have plan for my child . when they finish high school , I will send they to america to study there . I will pay for their study . and they will stay there . josh rushing : the night they show the pow and the dead soldier — al jazeera show they — it be powerful , because america do not show those kind of image . most of the news in america will not show really gory image and this show american soldier in uniform , strew about a floor , a cold tile floor . and it be revolt . it be absolutely revolt . it make I sick at my stomach . and then what hit I be , the night before , there have be some kind of bombing in basra , and al jazeera have show image of the people . and they be equally , if not more , horrify — the image be . and I remember having see it in the al jazeera office , and think to myself , " wow , that be gross . that be bad . " and then go away , and probably eat dinner or something . and it do not affect I as much . so , the impact that have on I — I realize that I just see people on the other side , and those people in the al jazeera office must have feel the way I be feel that night , and it upset I on a profound level that I be not as bother as much the night before . it make I hate war . but it do not make I believe that we be in a world that can live without war yet .     jehane noujaim : I be overwhelm by the response of the film . we do not know whether it would be able to get out there . we have no funding for it . we be incredibly lucky that it got pick up . and when we show the film in both the united states and the arab world , we have such incredible reaction . it be amazing to see how people be move by this film . in the arab world — and it be not really by the film , it be by the character — I mean , josh rushing be this incredibly complex person who be think about thing . and when I show the film in the middle east , people want to meet josh . he kind of redefine we as an american population . people start to ask I , " where be this guy now ? " al jazeera offer he a job . ( laughter ) and samir , on the other hand , be also quite an interesting character for the arab world to see , because it bring out the complexity of this love - hate relationship that the arab world have with the west .     in the united states , I be blow away by the motivation , the positive motivation of the american people when they would see this film . you know , we be criticize abroad for believe we be the savior of the world in some way , but the flip side of it be that , actually , when people do see what be happen abroad and people 's reaction to some of our policy abroad , we feel this power , that we need to — we feel like we have to get the power to change thing . and I see this with audience . this woman come up to I after the screening and say , " you know , I know this be crazy . I see the bomb be load on the plane , I see the military go out to war , but you do not understand people 's anger towards we until you see the people in the hospital and the victim of the war , and how do we get out of this bubble ?     how do we understand what the other person be think ? " now , I do not know whether a film can change the world . but I know the power of it , I know that it start people think about how to change the world .     now , I be not a philosopher , so I feel like I should not go into great depth on this , but let film speak for itself and take you to this other world . because I believe that film have the ability to take you across border , I would like you to just sit back and experience for a couple of minute be take into another world . and these couple clip take you inside of two of the most difficult conflict that we be face with today . [ the last 48 hour of two palestinian suicide bomber . ] [ paradise now ]     [ man : as long as there be injustice , someone must make a sacrifice ! ]     [ woman : that be no sacrifice , that be revenge ! ] [ if you kill , there be no difference between victim and occupier . ]     [ man : if we have airplane , we would not need martyr , that be the difference . ]     [ woman : the difference be that the israeli military be still strong . ]     [ man : then let we be equal in death . ] [ we still have paradise . ]     [ woman : there be no paradise ! it only exist in your head ! ]     [ man : god forbid ! ] [ may god forgive you . ] [ if you be not abu azzam 's daughter ... ] [ anyway , I would rather have paradise in my head than live in this hell ! ] [ in this life , we be dead anyway . ]     [ one only choose bitterness when the alternative be even bitterer . ]     [ woman : and what about we ? the one who remain ? ] [ will we win that way ? ] [ do not you see what you be do be destroy we ? ] [ and that you give israel an alibi to carry on ? ]     [ man : so with no alibi , israel will stop ? ]     [ woman : perhaps . we have to turn it into a moral war . ]     [ man : how , if israel have no moral ? ]     [ woman : be careful ! ] [ and the real people build peace through non - violence ] [ encounter point ] video : ( ambulance siren ) [ tel aviv , israel 1996 ]     [ tzvika : my wife ayelet call I and say , ] [ " there be a suicide bombing in tel aviv . " ]     [ ayelet : what do you know about the casualty ? ] [ tzvika off - screen : we be look for three girl . ]     [ we have no information . ]     [ ayelet : one be wound here , but we have not hear from the other three . ]     [ tzvika : I say , " ok , that be bat - chen , that be my daughter . ] [ be you sure she be dead ? " ] [ they say yes . ] video : ( police siren and shout over megaphone ) [ bethlehem , occupy palestinian territory , 2003 ]     [ george : on that day , at around 6:30 ] [ I be drive with my wife and daughter to the supermarket . ] [ when we get to here ... ] [ we see three israeli military jeep park on the side of the road . ] [ when we pass by the first jeep ... ] [ they open fire on we . ] [ and my 12 - year - old daughter christine ] [ be kill in the shooting . ] [ bereaved family forum , jerusalem ]     [ tzvika : I be the headmaster for all part . ]     [ george : but there be a teacher that be in charge ? ] [ tzvika : yes , I have assistant . ] [ I deal with child all the time . ] [ one year after their daughter ' death both tzvika and george join the forum ]     [ george : at first , I think it be a strange idea . ] [ but after think logically about it , ] [ I do not find any reason why not to meet they ] [ and let they know of our suffering . ]     [ tzvika : there be many thing that touch I . ] [ we see that there be palestinians who suffer a lot , who lose child , ] [ and still believe in the peace process and in reconciliation . ] [ if we who lose what be most precious can talk to each other , ] [ and look forward to a well future , ] [ then everyone else must do so , too . ] [ from south africa : a revolution through music ] [ amandla ] ( music )     ( video ) man : song be something that we communicate with people who otherwise would not have understand where we be come from . you could give they a long political speech , they would still not understand . but I tell you , when you finish that song , people will be like , " damn , I know where you niggas be come from . I know where you guy be come from . death unto apartheid ! "     narrator : it be about the liberation struggle . it be about those child who take to the street — fight , scream , " free nelson mandela ! " it be about those union who put down their tool and demand freedom . yes . yes ! ( music and singing ) ( singing ) freedom ! ( applause )     jehane noujaim : I think everybody be have that feeling of sit in a theater , in a dark room , with other stranger , watch a very powerful film , and they feel that feeling of transformation . and what I would like to talk about be how can we use that feeling to actually create a movement through film ? I 've be listen to the talk in the conference , and robert wright say yesterday that if we have an appreciation for another person 's humanity , then they will have an appreciation for ours . and that be what this be about . it be about connect people through film , get these independent voice out there . now , josh rushing actually end up leave the military and take a job with al jazeera . ( laughter ) so his feeling be that he be at al jazeera international because he feel like he can actually use medium to bridge the gap between east and west . and that be an amazing thing . but I 've be try to think about way to give power to these independent voice , to give power to the filmmaker , to give power to people who be try to use film for change . and there be incredible organization that be out there do this already . there be witness , that you hear from early . there be just vision , that be work with palestinians and israelis who be work together for peace , and document that process and get interview out there and use this film to take to congress to show that it be a powerful tool , to show that this be a woman who be have her daughter kill in an attack , and she believe that there be peaceful way to solve this . there be work film and there be current tv , which be an incredible platform for people around the world to be able to put their — ( applause ) yeah , it be amazing . I 've watch it and I be blow away by it and its potential to bring voice from around the world — independent voice from around the world — and create a truly democratic , global television .     so what can we do to create a platform for these organization , to create some momentum , to get everybody in the world involve in this movement ? I would like for we to imagine for a second . imagine a day when you have everyone come together from around the world . you have town and village and theater — all from around the world , get together , and sit in the dark , and share a communal experience of watch a film , or a couple of film , together . watch a film which maybe highlight a character that be fight to live , or just a character that defy stereotype , make a joke , sing a song . comedy , documentary , short . this amazing power can be use to change people and to bond people together ; to cross border , and have people feel like they be have a communal experience . so if you imagine this day when all around the world , you have theater and place where we project film . if you imagine project from time square to tahrir square in cairo , the same film in ramallah , the same film in jerusalem . you know , we 've be talk to a friend of mine about use the side of the great pyramid and the great wall of china . it be endless what you can imagine , in term of where you can project film and where you can have this communal experience . and I believe that this one day , if we can create it , this one day can create momentum for all of these independent voice . there be not an organization which be connect the independent voice of the world to get out there , and yet I be hear throughout this conference that the big challenge in our future be understand the other , and have mutual respect for the other and cross border . and if film can do that , and if we can get all of these different location in the world to watch these film together — this could be an incredible day .     so we 've already make a partnership , set up through somebody from the ted community , john camen , who introduce I to steven apkon , from the jacob burns film center . and we start call up everybody . and in the last week , there have be so many people that have respond to we , from as close as palo alto , to mongolia and to india . there be people that want to be a part of this global day of film ; to be able to provide a platform for independent voice and independent film to get out there . now , we 've think about a name for this day , and I would like to share this with you . now , the most amazing part of this whole process have be share idea and wish , and so I invite you to give brainstorm onto how do this day echo into the future ? how do we use technology to make this day echo into the future , so that we can build community and have these community work together , through the internet ? there be a time , many , many year ago , when all of the continent be stick together . and we call that landmass pangea . so what we would like to call this day of film be pangea cinema day . and if you just imagine that all of these people in these town would be watch , then I think that we can actually really make a movement towards people understand each other well .     I know that it be very intangible , touch people 's heart and soul , but the only way that I know how to do it , the only way that I know how to reach out to somebody 's heart and soul all across the world , be by show they a film . and I know that there be independent filmmaker and film out there that can really make this happen . and that be my wish . I guess I be suppose to give you my one - sentence wish , but we be way out of time .     chris anderson : that be an incredible wish . pangea cinema : the day the world come together .     jn : it be more tangible than world peace , and it be certainly more immediate . but it would be the day that the world come together through film , the power of film .     can : lady and gentleman , jehane noujaim .  
   ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     thank you !     ( applause continue )     thank you very much . like the speaker before I — I be a ted virgin , I guess . I be also the first time here , and ...     ( laughter )     I do not know what to say !     ( applause )     I be really happy that mr . anderson invite I . I be really grateful that I get a chance to play for everyone . and the song that I just play be by josef hofmann . it be call " kaleidoscope . " and hofmann be a polish pianist and composer of the late 19th century , and he be widely consider one of the great pianist of all time .     I have another piece that I would like to play for you . it be call " abegg variation , " by robert schumann , a german 19th - century composer . the name " abegg " be actually a - b - e - g - g , and that be the main theme in the melody . ( play the note a , b , e , g and g ) that come from the last name of one of schumann 's female friend .     ( laughter )     but he write that for his wife .     ( laughter )     so actually , if you listen carefully , there be suppose to be five variation on this abegg theme . it be write around 1834 , so even though it be old , I hope you 'll like it .     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     now come the part that I hate . well , because mr . anderson tell I that this session be call " sync and flow , " I be wonder , " what do I know that these genius do not ? "     ( laughter )     so , I 'll talk about musical composition , even though I do not know where to start .     how do I compose ? I think yamaha do a really good job of teach we how to compose . what I do first be , I make a lot of little musical idea you can just improvise here at the piano — and I choose one of those to become my main theme , my main melody , like the abegg that you just hear . and once I choose my main theme , I have to decide : out of all the style in music , what kind of style do I want ? and this year , I compose a romantic style . so for inspiration , I listen to liszt and tchaikovsky and all the great romantic composer .     next , I make the structure of the entire piece with my teacher . they help I plan out the whole piece . and then the hard part be fill it in with musical idea , because then you have to think .     ( laughter )     and then , when the piece take somewhat of a solified form — solidify , excuse I — solidify form , you be suppose to actually polish the piece , polish the detail , and then polish the overall performance of the composition .     and another thing that I enjoy do be draw . drawing , because I like to draw , you know , japanese anime art . I think that be a craze among teen right now . and once I realize it , there be a parallel between create music and create art , because for your motive , or your little initial idea for your drawing , it be your character — you want to decide who you want to draw , or if you want to draw an original character . and then you want to decide : how be you go to draw the character ? like , be I go to use one page ? be I go to draw it on the computer ? be I go to use a two - page spread like a comic book ? for a more grandiose effect , I guess . and then you have to do the initial sketch of the character , which be like your structure of a piece , and then you add pen and pencil , and whatever detail that you need — that be polish the drawing .     and another thing that both of these have in common be your state of mind , because I know I be one of those teenager that be really easily distract . so if I be try to do homework and I do not feel like it , I 'll try to draw or , you know , waste my time . and then what happen be , sometimes I absolutely can not draw or I can not compose at all , and then it be like there be too much on your mind . you can not focus on what you be suppose to do . and sometimes , if you manage to use your time wisely and work on it , you 'll get something out of it , but it do not come naturally .     what happen be , if something magical happen , if something natural happen to you , you be able to produce all this beautiful stuff instantly , and then that be what I consider " flow , " because that be when everything click and you be able to do anything . you feel like you be on top of your game and you can do anything you want .     I be not go to play my own composition today because , although I do finish it , it be way too long . instead , I would like to try something call " improvisation . " I have here seven note card , one with each note of the musical alphabet . and I would like someone to come up here and choose five — anyone to come up here and choose five — and then I can make it into some sort of melody , and I 'll improvise it . wow . a volunteer , yay !     ( laughter )     ( applause )     jennifer lin : nice to meet you .     goldie hawn : thank you . choose five ?     jl : yes , five card . any five card .     gh : ok , one . jl : ok .     gh : two . jl : yes .     gh : three .     gh : oh , d and f — too familiar .     ( laughter )     jl : one more . gh : ok . " e " for " effort . "     jl : would you mind read they out in the order that you choose they ?     gh : ok — c , g , b , a and e.     jl : thank you very much !     gh : you be welcome . and what about these ?     jl : I will not use they . thank you !     ( applause )     now , she choose c , g , b , a , e. I be go to try to put that in some sort of order .     ( plays note )     ok , that be nice . so , I be go to have a moment to think , and I 'll try to make something out of it .     ( play the five note )     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     the next song , or the encore that I be go to play be call " bumble boogie , " by jack fina .     ( applause )     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )  
   ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     ( applause end )     hi , everyone . I be sirena . I be 11 year old and from connecticut . ( audience cheer )     ( applause )     well , I be not really sure why I be here .     ( laughter )     I mean , what do this have to do with technology , entertainment and design ? well , I count my ipod , cellphone and computer as technology , but this have nothing to do with that .     so I do a little research on it . well , this be what I find . of course , I hope I can memorize it .     ( clear throat )     the violin be make of a wood box and four metal string . by pull a string , it vibrate and produce a sound wave , which pass through a piece of wood call a bridge , and go down to the wood box and gets amplify , but ... let I think .     ( laughter )     place your finger at different place on the fingerboard change the string length , and that change the frequency of the sound wave . ( sigh ) oh , my gosh !     ( laughter )     ok , this be sort of technology , but I can call it a 16th - century technology . but actually , the most fascinating thing that I find be that even the audio system or wave transmission nowadays be still base on the same principle of produce and project sound . be not that cool ?     ( laughter )     ( applause )     design — I love its design . I remember when I be little , my mom ask I , " would you like to play the violin or the piano ? " I look at that giant monster and say to myself — " I be not go to lock myself on that bench the whole day ! "     ( laughter )     this be small and lightweight . I can play from stand , sit or walk . and , you know what ? the good of all be that if I do not want to practice , ( whispering ) I can hide it .     ( laughter )     the violin be very beautiful . some people relate it as the shape of a lady . but whether you like it or not , it be be so for more than 400 year , unlike modern stuff [ that ] easily looks date . but I think it be very personal and unique that , although each violin look pretty similar , no two violin sound the same — even from the same maker or base on the same model .     entertainment — I love the entertainment . but actually , the instrument itself be not very entertaining . I mean , when I first get my violin and try to play around on it , it be actually really bad , because it do not sound the way I would hear from other kid — it be so horrible and so scratchy . so , it be not entertain at all . but besides , my brother find this very funny : yuk ! yuk ! yuk !     ( laughter )     a few year later , I hear a joke about the great violinist , jascha heifetz . after mr . heifetz 's concert , a lady come over and compliment he : " oh , mr . heifetz , your violin sound so great tonight ! " and mr . heifetz be a very cool person , so he pick up his violin and say , " funny — I do not hear anything . "     ( laughter )     now I realize that as the musician , we human being , with our great mind , artistic heart and skill , can change this 16th - century technology and a legendary design to a wonderful entertainment . now I know why I be here .     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     at first , I think I be just go to be here to perform , but unexpectedly , I learn and enjoy much more . but ... although some of the talk be quite up there for I .     ( laughter )     like the multi - dimension stuff . I mean , honestly , I would be happy enough if I could actually get my two dimension correct in school .     ( laughter )     but actually , the most impressive thing to I be that — well , actually , I would also like to say this for all child be to say thank you to all adult , for actually care for we a lot , and to make our future world much well . thank you .     ( applause )     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )     ( applause end )     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )  
   in term of invention , I would like to tell you the tale of one of my favorite project . I think it be one of the most exciting that I be work on , but I think it be also the simple .     it be a project that have the potential to make a huge impact around the world . it address one of the big health issue on the planet , the number one cause of death in child under five . which be ... ? water - bear disease ? diarrhea ? malnutrition ? no . it be breathe the smoke from indoor cooking fire — acute respiratory infection cause by this . can you believe that ?     I find this shocking and somewhat appalling . can not we make clean burn cooking fuel ? can not we make well stove ? how be it that this can lead to over two million death every year ? I know bill joy be talk to you about the wonder of carbon nanotube , so I be go to talk to you about the wonder of carbon macro - tube , which be charcoal .     ( laughter )     so this be a picture of rural haiti . haiti be now 98 percent deforest . you 'll see scene like this all over the island . it lead to all sort of environmental problem and problem that affect people throughout the nation . a couple year ago there be severe flooding that lead to thousand of death — that be directly attributable to the fact that there be no tree on the hill to stabilize the soil . so the rain come — they go down the river and the flooding happen .     now one of the reason why there be so few tree be this : people need to cook , and they harvest wood and they make charcoal in order to do it . it be not that people be ignorant to the environmental damage . they know perfectly well , but they have no other choice . fossil fuel be not available , and solar energy do not cook the way that they like their food prepare . and so this be what they do . you 'll find family like this who go out into the forest to find a tree , cut it down and make charcoal out of it . so not surprisingly , there be a lot of effort that be be do to look at alternative cooking fuel .     about four year ago , I take a team of student down to haiti and we work with peace corps volunteer there . this be one such volunteer and this be a device that he have build in the village where he work . and the idea be that you could take waste paper ; you could compress it and make briquette that could be use for fuel . but this device be very slow . so our engineering student go to work on it and with some very simple change , they be able to triple the throughput of this device . so you could imagine they be very excited about it . and they take the briquette back to mit so that they could test they . and one of the thing that they find be they do not burn . so it be a little discouraging to the student .     ( laughter )     and in fact , if you look closely , right here you can see it say , " us peace corps . " as it turn out , there actually be not any waste paper in this village . and while it be a good use of government paperwork for this volunteer to bring it back with he to his village , it be 800 kilometer away . and so we think perhaps there might be a well way to come up with an alternative cooking fuel .     what we want to do be we want to make a fuel that use something that be readily available on the local level . you see these all over haiti as well . they be small - scale sugar mill . and the waste product from they after you extract the juice from the sugarcane be call " bagasse . " it have no other use . it have no nutritional value , so they do not feed it to the animal . it just sit in a pile near the sugar mill until eventually they burn it . what we want to do be we want to find a way to harness this waste resource and turn it into a fuel that would be something that people could easily cook with , something like charcoal . so over the next couple of year , student and I work to develop a process .     so you start with the bagasse , and then you take a very simple kiln that you can make out of a waste fifty five - gallon oil drum . after some time , after set it on fire , you seal it to restrict the oxygen that go into the kiln , and then you end up with this carbonize material here . however , you can not burn this . it be too fine and it burn too quickly to be useful for cook . so we have to try to find a way to form it into useful briquette . and conveniently , one of my student be from ghana , and he remember a dish his mom use to make for he call " kokonte , " which be a very sticky porridge make out of the cassava root . and so what we do be we look , and we find that cassava be indeed grow in haiti , under the name of " manioc . " in fact , it be grow all over the world — yucca , tapioca , manioc , cassava , it be all the same thing — a very starchy root vegetable . and you can make a very thick , sticky porridge out of it , which you can use to bind together the charcoal briquette . so we do this . we go down to haiti . these be the graduate of the first ecole de charbon , or charcoal institute . and these —     ( laughter )     that be right . so I be actually an instructor at mit as well as cit . and these be the briquette that we make .     now I be go to take you to a different continent . this be india and this be the most commonly use cooking fuel in india . it be cow dung . and more than in haiti , this produce really smoky fire , and this be where you see the health impact of cook with cow dung and biomass as a fuel . kid and woman be especially affect by it , because they be the one who be around the cooking fire .     so we want to see if we could introduce this charcoal - make technology there . well , unfortunately , they do not have sugarcane and they do not have cassava , but that do not stop we . what we do be we find what be the locally available source of biomass . and there be wheat straw and there be rice straw in this area . and what we could use as a binder be actually small amount of cow manure , which they use ordinarily for their fuel . and we do side - by - side test , and here you can see the charcoal briquette and here the cow dung . and you can see that it be a lot clean burning of a cooking fuel . and in fact , it heat the water a lot more quickly . and so we be very happy , thus far . but one of the thing that we find be when we do side - by - side comparison with wood charcoal , it do not burn as long . and the briquette crumble a little bit and we lose energy as they fall apart as they be cook . so we want to try to find a way to make a strong briquette so that we could compete with wood charcoal in the market in haiti .     so we go back to mit , we take out the instron machine and we figure out what sort of force you need in order to compress a briquette to the level that you actually be get improve performance out of it ? and at the same time that we have student in the lab look at this , we also have community partner in haiti work to develop the process , to improve it and make it more accessible to people in the village there . and after some time , we develop a low - cost press that allow you to produce charcoal , which actually now burn not only — actually , it burn long , clean than wood charcoal .     so now we be in a situation where we have a product , which be actually well than what you can buy in haiti in the marketplace , which be a very wonderful place to be . in haiti alone , about 30 million tree be cut down every year . there be a possibility of this be implement and save a good portion of those . in addition , the revenue generate from that charcoal be 260 million dollar . that be an awful lot for a country like haiti — with a population of eight million and an average income of less than 400 dollar . so this be where we be also move ahead with our charcoal project .     and one of the thing that I think be also interesting , be I have a friend up at uc berkeley who be be do risk analysis . and he be look at the problem of the health impact of burn wood versus charcoal . and he be find that worldwide , you could prevent a million death switch from wood to charcoal as a cooking fuel . that be remarkable , but up until now , there be not way to do it without cut down tree . but now we have a way that be use an agricultural waste material to create a cooking fuel .     one of the really exciting thing , though , be something that come out of the trip that I take to ghana just last month . and I think it be the cool thing , and it be even low tech than what you just see , if you can imagine such a thing . here it be . so what be this ? this be corncobs turn into charcoal . and the beauty of this be that you do not need to form briquette — it come ready make . this be my $ 100 laptop , right here . and actually , like nick , I bring sample .     ( laughter )     so we can pass these around . they be fully functional , field - test , ready to roll out .     ( laughter )     and I think one of the thing which be also remarkable about this technology , be that the technology transfer be so easy . compare to the sugarcane charcoal , where we have to teach people how to form it into briquette and you have the extra step of cook the binder , this come pre - briquetted . and this be about the most exciting thing in my life right now , which be perhaps a sad commentary on my life .     ( laughter )     but once you see it , like you guy in the front row — all right , yeah , ok . so anyway —     ( laughter )     here it be . and this be , I think , a perfect example of what robert wright be talk about in those non - zero - sum thing . so not only do you have health benefit , you have environmental benefit . but this be one of the incredibly rare situation where you also have economic benefit . people can make their own cooking fuel from waste product . they can generate income from this . they can save the money that they be go to spend on charcoal and they can produce excess and sell it in the market to people who be not make their own . it be really rare that you do not have trade - off between health and economic , or environment and economic . so this be a project that I just find extremely exciting and I be really look forward to see where it take we .     so when we talk about , now , the future we will create , one of the thing that I think be necessary be to have a very clear vision of the world that we live in . and now , I do not actually mean the world that we live in . I mean the world where woman spend two to three hour everyday grind grain for their family to eat . I mean the world where advanced building material mean cement roofing tile that be make by hand , and where , when you work 10 hour a day , you be still only earn 60 dollar in a month . I mean the world where woman and child spend 40 billion hour a year fetching water . that be as if the entire workforce of the state of california work full time for a year do nothing but fetch water .     it be a place where , for example , if this be india , in this room , only three of we would have a car . if this be afghanistan , only one person in this room would know how the use the internet . if this be zambia — 300 of you would be farmer , 100 of you would have aid or hiv . and more than half of you would be live on less than a dollar a day . these be the issue that we need to come up with solution for . these be the issue that we need to be train our engineer , our designer , our business people , our entrepreneur to be face . these be the solution that we need to find .     I have a few area that I believe be especially important that we address . one of they be create technology to promote micro - finance and micro - enterprise , so that people who be live below the poverty line can find a way to move out — and that they be not do it use the same traditional basket making , poultry rearing , etc . but there be new technology and new product that they can make on a small scale .     the next thing I believe be that we need to create technology for poor farmer to add value to their own crop . and we need to rethink our development strategy , so that we be not promote educational campaign to get they to stop be farmer , but rather to stop be poor farmer . and we need to think about how we can do that effectively . we need to work with the people in these community and give they the resource and the tool that they need to solve their own problem . that be the good way to do it . we should not be do it from outside . so we need to create this future , and we need to start do it now .     thank you .     ( applause )     chris anderson : thank you , incredible . stay here . tell we — just while we see if someone have a question — just tell we about one of the other thing that you 've work on .     amy smith : some of the other thing we be work on be way to do low - cost water quality testing , so that community can maintain their own water system , know when they be work , know when they treat they , etc . we be also look at low - cost water - treatment system . one of the really exciting thing be look at solar water disinfection and improve the ability to be able to do that .     can : what be the bottleneck prevent this stuff get from scale ? do you need to find entrepreneur , or venture capitalist , or what do you need to take what you 've get and get it to scale ?     as : I think it be large number of people move it forward . it be a difficult thing — it be a marketplace which be very fragmented and a consumer population with no income . so you can not use the same model that you use in the united states for make thing move forward . and we be a pretty small staff , which be I .     ( laughter )     so , you know , I do what I can with the student . we have 30 student a year go out into the field and try to implement this and move it forward . the other thing be you have to do thing with a long time frame , as , you know , you can not expect to get something do in a year or two year ; you have to be look five or 10 year ahead . but I think with the vision to do that , we can move forward .  
   over the past couple of day , as I 've be prepare for my speech , I 've become more and more nervous about what I be go to say and about be on the same stage as all these fascinating people . be on the same stage as al gore , who be the first person I ever vote for . and —     ( laughter )     so I be get pretty nervous and , you know , I do not know that chris sit on the stage , and that be more nerve - racking . but then I start think about my family . I start think about my father and my grandfather and my great - grandfather , and I realize that I have all of these ted go through my bloodstream —     ( laughter )     that I have to consider this " my element . "     so , who be I ? chris kind of mention I start a company with my husband . we have about 125 people internationally . if you look in the book , you see this ...     ( laughter )     which I really be appal by .     ( laughter )     and because I want to impress you all with slide , since I see the great presentation yesterday with graph , I make a graph that move , and I talk about the makeup of I .     ( laughter )     so , besides this freakish thing , this be my science slide . this be math , and this be science , this be genetic . this be my grandmother , and this be where I get this mouth .     ( laughter )     so — I be a blogger , which , probably , to a lot of you , mean different thing . you may have hear about the kryptonite lock brouhaha , where a blogger talk about how you hack or break into a kryptonite lock use a ballpoint pen , and it spread all over . kryptonite have to adjust the lock , and they have to address it to avoid too many customer concern . you may have hear about rathergate , which be basically the result of blogger realize that the " th " in 111 be not typeset on an old typewriter ; it be on word . blogger expose this , or they work hard to expose this . you know , blog be scary . this be what you see . I see this , and I be sure scared — I swear on stage — shitless about blog , because this be not something that be friendly . but there be blog that be change the way we read news and consume medium , and these be great example . these people be reach thousand , if not million , of reader , and that be incredibly important . during the hurricane , you have msnbc post about the hurricane on their blog , update it frequently . this be possible because of the easy nature of blogge tool .     you have my friend , who have a blog on pvrs , personal recorder . he make enough money just by run ad , to support his family up in oregon . that be all he do now , and this be something that blog have make possible . and then you have something like this , which be interplast . it be a wonderful organization of people and doctor who go to develop nation to offer plastic surgery to those who need it . child with cleft palate get it , and they document their story . this be wonderful . I be not that care .     ( laughter )     I talk about myself . that be what I be . I be a blogger . I have always decide that I be go to be an expert on one thing , and I be an expert on this person , and so I write about it . so , the short story about my blog : it start in 2001 , I be 23 . I be not happy with my job , because I be a designer , but I be not be really stimulate . I be an english major in college . I do not have any use for it , but I miss writing . so , I start to write a blog and I start to create thing like these little story . this be an illustration about my camp experience when I be 11 year old , and how I go to a ymca camp , christian camp , and basically by the end , I have make my friend hate I so much that I hide in a bunk , they could not find I , they send a search party , and I overhear people say they wish I have kill myself — jump off bible peak .     you can laugh , this be ok .     ( laughter )     this be I . this be what happen to I . and when I start my blog , it be really this one goal — I say , " I be not go to be famous to the world , but I could be famous to people on the internet . " and I set a goal . I say , " I be go to win an award , " because I have never win an award in my entire life . and I say , " I be go to win the south by southwest weblog award . " and I win it — I reach all of these people , and I have ten of thousand of people read about my life every day .     and then I write a post about a banjo . I write a post about want to buy a banjo — a $ 300 banjo , which be a lot of money . and I do not play instrument ; I do not know anything about music . I like music , and I like banjos , and I think I probably hear steve martin playing , and I say , " I could do that . " and I say to my husband , " ben , can I buy a banjo ? " and he be like , " no . "     and my husband —     ( laughter )     this be my husband , who be very hot — he win an award for be hot .     ( laughter )     he tell I , " you can not buy a banjo . you be just like your dad , " who collect instrument . and I write a post about how I be so mad at he , he be such a tyrant — he would not let I buy this banjo . and those people who know I understand my joke — this be mena , this be how I make a joke at people . because the joke in this be that this person be not a tyrant , this person be so loving and so sweet that he let I dress he up and post picture of he to my blog .     ( laughter )     and if he know I be show this right now — I put this in today — he would kill I .     but the thing be , my friend read it , and they be like , " oh , that mena , she write a post about want a stupid thing and be stupid . " but I get email from people that say , " oh my god , your husband be such an asshole . how much money do he spend on beer in a year ? you could take that money and buy your banjo . why do not you open a separate account ? " I 've be with he since I be 17 , we 've never have a separate bank account . they say , " separate your bank account . spend your money ; spend his money , that be it . " and then I get people say , " leave he . "     ( laughter )     I be like , " ok , what ? who be these people ? and why be they read this ? " and I realize : I do not want to reach these people . I do not want to write for this public audience . and I start to kill my blog slowly . I be like , I do not want to write this anymore . slowly and slowly —     and I do tell personal story from time to time . I write this one , and I put this up because of einstein today . I be go to get choke up , because this be my first pet , and she pass away two year ago . and I decide to break from , " I do not really write about my public life , " because I want to give she a little memorial . but anyways , it be these sort of personal story — you know , you read the blog about politic or about medium , and gossip and all these thing . these be out there , but it be more of the personal that interest I , and this be who I be .     you see norman rockwell , and you have art critic say , " norman rockwell be not art . norman rockwell hang in living room and bathroom , and this be not something to be consider high art . " and I think this be one of the most important thing to we as human . these thing resonate with we , and , if you think about blog , you think of high art blog , the history painting about , you know , all the biblical story , and then you have this . these be the blog that interest I : the people that just tell story .     one story be about this baby , and his name be odin . his father be a blogger . and he be write his blog one day , and his wife give birth to her baby at 25 week . and he never expect this . one day , it be normal ; the next day , it be hell . and this be a one - pound baby . so odin be document every single day .     picture be take every day : day one , day two ... you have day nine — they be talk about his apnea ; day 39 — he get pneumonia . his baby be so small , and I 've never encounter such a — just — a disturbing image , but just so heartfelt . and you be read this as it happen , so on day 55 , everybody read that he be have failure : breathing failure and heart failure , and it be slow down , and you do not know what to expect .     but then it get well . day 96 , he go home . and you see this post . that be not something you be go to see in a paper or magazine but this be something this person feel , and people be excited about it — 28 comment . that be not a huge amount of people read , but 28 people matter . and today , he be a healthy baby , who , if you read his blog — it be snowdeal.org , his father 's blog — he be take picture of he still , because he be still his son and he be , I think , at his age level right now because he have receive such great treatment from the hospital .     so , blog . so what ? you 've probably hear these thing before . we talk about the well , and about all these sort of thing throughout our online history . but I think blog be basically just an evolution , and that be where we be today . it be this record of who you be , your persona . you have your google search , where you say , " what be mena trott ? " and then you find these thing and you be happy or unhappy . but then you also find people 's blog , and those be the record of people that be write daily — not necessarily about the same topic , but thing that interest they . and we talk about the world flatten , be in this panel , and I be very optimistic — whenever I think about blog , I be like , " we 've get to reach all these people . " hundred of million and billion of people . we be get into china , we want to be there , but there be so many people that will not have the access to write a blog . but to see something like the $ 100 computer be amazing , because blogge software be simple . we have a successful company because of timing , and because of perseverance , but it be simple stuff — it be not rocket science . and so , that be an amazing thing to consider . so — the life record of a blog be something that I find incredibly important .     and we start with a slide of my ted , and I have to add this slide , because I know the minute I show this , my mom — my mom will see this , because she do read my blog and she 'll say , " why be not there a picture of I ? " this be my mom . so , I have all the people that I know of . but this be basically the extent of the family that I know in term of my direct line . I show a norman rockwell painting before , and this one , I grow up with , look at constantly . I would spend hour look at the connection , say , " oh , the little kid up at the top have red hair ; so do that first generation up there . " and it be just these little thing . this be not science , but this be enough for I to be really interested in how we have evolve and how we can trace our line . so that have always influence I .     I have this record , this 1910 census , of another grabowski — that be my maiden name — and there be a theodore , because there be always a theodore . this be all I have , a couple of fact about somebody . I have their date of birth , their age , what they do in their household , if they speak english , and that be it , that be all I know of these people . and it be pretty sad , because I only go back five generation , and that be it . I do not even know what happen on my mom 's side , because she be from cuba and I do not have that many thing . just do this , I spend time in the archive — that be why my husband be a saint — I spend time in the washington archive , just sit there , look for these thing . now it be online , but he sit through that .     and so you have this record and — this be my great - great - grandmother . this be the only picture I have . and to think of what we have the ability to do with our blog ; to think about the people that be on those $ 100 computer , talk about who they be , share these personal story — this be an amazing thing .     another photo that have greatly influence I , or a series of photo , be this project that be do by an argentinean man and his wife . and he be basically take a picture of his family every day for the past , what be ' 76 ? — 20 ... oh my god , I be ' 77 — 29 year ? twenty - nine year .     there be a joke , originally , about my graph that I leave out , which be : you see all this math ? I be just happy I be able to add it up to 100 , because that be my skill set .     ( laughter )     so you have these people age , and now this be they today , or last year . and that be a powerful thing to have , to be able to track this . I wish that I would have this of my family . I know that one day my child will be wonder — or my grandchild , or my great - grandchild , if I ever have child — what I be go to — who I be . so I do something that be very narcissistic —     I be a blogger — that be an amazing thing for I , because it capture a moment in time every day . I take a picture of myself — I 've be do this since last year — every single day . and , you know , it be the same picture ; it be basically the same person .     only a couple of people read it . I do not write this for this audience ; I be show it now , but I would go insane if this be really public . about four people probably read it , and they tell I , " you have not update . " I be probably go to get people tell I I have not update . but this be amazing , because I can go back to a day — to april 2005 , and say , what be I do this day ? I look at it , I know exactly . it be this visual cue that be so important to what we do . I put the bad picture up too , because there be bad picture .     ( laughter )     and I remember instantly : I be in germany in this — I have to go for a one - day trip . I be sick , and I be in a hotel room , and I want not to be there . and so you see these thing , it be not just always smile . now I 've kind of evolve it , so I have this look . if you look at my driver 's license , I have the same look , and it be a pretty disturbing thing , but it be something that be really important .     and the last story I really want to tell be this story , because this be probably the one that mean the most to I in all of what I be do . I 'll probably get choke up , because I tend to when I talk about this . so , this woman , her name be emma , and she be a blogger on our service , typepad . and she be a beta tester , so she be there right when we open — you know , there be 100 people . and she write about her life deal with cancer . she be write and writing , and we all start read it , because we have so few blog on the service , we could keep track of everyone .     and she be write one day , and then she disappear for a little bit . and her sister come on , and she say that emma have pass away . and all of our support staff who have talk to she be really emotional , and it be a very hard day at the company .     and this be one of those instance where I realize how much blogging affect our relationship , and flatten this sort of world . that this woman be in england , and she live — she live — a life where she be talk about what she be do . but the big thing that really influence we be , her sister write to I , and she say — and she write on this blog — that write her blog during the last couple of month of her life be probably the good thing that have happen to she , and be able to talk to people and to share what be go on , and be able to write and receive comment . and that be amazing , to be able to know that we have empower that , and that blogging be something that she feel comfortable doing , and the idea that blogging do not have to be scary , that we do not always have to be attack of the blog , that we can be people who be open , and want to help and talk to people . that be an amazing thing .     and so I print out and send a pdf of her blog to her family , and they pass it out at her memorial service , and even in her obituary , they mention her blog , because it be such a big part of her life . and that be a huge thing .     so , this be her legacy , and I think that my call to action to all of you be : think about blog , think about what they be , think about what you 've think of they , and then actually do it , because it be something that be really go to change our life .     so , thank you .     ( applause )  
   I bet you be worried .     ( laughter )     I be worried . that be why I begin this piece . I be worried about vagina . I be worried what we think about vagina and even more worried that we do not think about they . I be worried about my own vagina . it need a context , a culture , a community of other vagina . there be so much darkness and secrecy surround they . like the bermuda triangle , nobody ever report back from there .     ( laughter )     in the first place , it be not so easy to even find your vagina . woman go day , week , month , without look at it . I interview a high - power businesswoman ; she tell I she do not have time . " look at your vagina , " she say , " be a full day 's work . "     ( laughter )     " you 've get to get down there on your back , in front of a mirror , full - length preferred . you 've get to get in the perfect position with the perfect light , which then becomes shadow by the angle you be at . you be twist your head up , arch your back , it be exhausting . " she be busy ; she do not have time . so I decide to talk to woman about their vagina . they begin as casual vagina interview , and they turn into vagina monologue . I talk with over 200 woman . I talk to old woman , young woman , married woman , lesbian , single woman . I talk to corporate professional , college professor , actor , sex worker . I talk to african - american woman , asian - american woman , native - american woman , caucasian woman , jewish woman .     ok , at first woman be a little shy , a little reluctant to talk . once they got go , you could not stop they . woman love to talk about their vagina , they do . mainly because no one be ever ask they before .     ( laughter )     let us just start with the word " vagina " — vagina , vagina . it sound like an infection , at good . maybe a medical instrument . " hurry , nurse , bring the vagina ! "     ( laughter )     vagina , vagina , vagina .     it do not matter how many time you say the word , it never sound like a word you want to say . it be a completely ridiculous , totally un - sexy word . if you use it during sex , try to be politically correct , " darling , would you stroke my vagina , " you kill the act right there .     ( laughter )     I be worried what we call they and do not call they . in great neck , new york , they call it a pussycat . a woman tell I there her mother use to tell she , " do not wear pantie , dear , underneath your pajama . you need to air out your pussycat . "     ( laughter )     in westchester , they call it a pooki , in new jersey , a twat . there be powderbox , derriere , a pooky , a poochi , a poopi , a poopelu , a pooninana , a padepachetchki , a pal , and a piche .     ( laughter )     there be toadie , dee dee , nishi , dignity , coochi snorcher , cooter , labbe , gladys seagelman , va , wee wee , horsespot , nappy dugout , mongo , ghoulie , powderbox , a mimi in miami , a split knish in philadelphia ...     ( laughter )     and a schmende in the bronx .     ( laughter )     I be worried about vagina . this be how the " vagina monologue " begin . but it really do not begin there . it begin with a conversation with a woman . we be have a conversation about menopause , and we get onto the subject of her vagina , which you 'll do if you be talk about menopause . and she say thing that really shock I about her vagina — that it be dry - up and finish and dead — and I be kind of shocked . so I say to a friend casually , " well , what do you think about your vagina ? " and that woman say something more amazing , and then the next woman say something more amazing , and before I know it , every woman be tell I I have to talk to somebody about their vagina because they have an amazing story , and I be suck down the vagina trail .     ( laughter )     and I really have not get off of it . I think if you have tell I when I be young that I be go to grow up , and be in shoe store , and people would scream out , " there she be , the vagina lady ! " I do not know that that would have be my life ambition .     ( laughter )     but I want to talk a little bit about happiness , and the relationship to this whole vagina journey , because it have be an extraordinary journey that begin eight year ago . I think before I do the " vagina monologue , " I do not really believe in happiness . I think that only idiot be happy , to be honest . I remember when I start practice buddhism 14 year ago , and I be tell that the end of this practice be to be happy , I say , " how could you be happy and live in this world of suffering and live in this world of pain ? " I mistook happiness for a lot of other thing , like numbness or decadence or selfishness . and what happen through the course of the " vagina monologue " and this journey be , I think I have come to understand a little bit more about happiness .     there be three quality I want to talk about . one be see what be right in front of you , and talk about it , and state it . I think what I learn from talk about the vagina and speak about the vagina , be it be the most obvious thing — it be right in the center of my body and the center of the world — and yet it be the one thing nobody talk about . the second thing be that what talk about the vagina do be it open this door which allow I to see that there be a way to serve the world to make it well . and that be where the deep happiness have actually come from . and the third principle of happiness , which I 've realize recently :     eight year ago , this momentum and this energy , this " v - wave " start — and I can only describe it as a " v - wave " because , to be honest , I really do not understand it completely ; I feel at the service of it . but this wave start , and if I question the wave , or try to stop the wave or look back at the wave , I often have the experience of whiplash or the potential of my neck breaking . but if I go with the wave , and I trust the wave and I move with the wave , I go to the next place , and it happen logically and organically and truthfully . and I start this piece , particularly with story and narrative , and I be talk to one woman and that lead to another woman and that lead to another woman . and then I write those story down , and I put they out in front of other people .     and every single time I do the show at the beginning , woman would literally line up after the show , because they want to tell I their story . and at first I think , " oh great , I 'll hear about wonderful orgasm , and great sex life , and how woman love their vagina . " but in fact , that be not what woman line up to tell I . what woman line up to tell I be how they be rape , and how they be batter , and how they be beat , and how they be gang - rape in parking lot , and how they be inceste by their uncle . and I want to stop do the " vagina monologue , " because it feel too daunting . I feel like a war photographer who take picture of terrible event , but do not intervene on their behalf .     and so in 1997 , I say , " let us get woman together . what could we do with this information that all these woman be be violate ? " and it turn out , after think and investigate , that I discover — and the un have actually say this recently — that one out of every three woman on this planet will be beat or rape in her lifetime . that be essentially a gender ; that be essentially the resource of the planet , which be woman . so in 1997 we get all these incredible woman together and we say , " how can we use the play , this energy , to stop violence against woman ? " and we put on one event in new york city , in the theater , and all these great actor come — from susan sarandon , to glenn close , to whoopi goldberg — and we do one performance on one evening , and that catalyze this wave , this energy .     and within five year , this extraordinary thing begin to happen . one woman take that energy and she say , " I want to bring this wave , this energy , to college campus , " and so she take the play and she say , " let us use the play and have performance once a year , where we can raise money to stop violence against woman in local community all around the world . " and in one year , it go to 50 college , and then it expand . and over the course of the last six year , it be spread and it be spread and it be spread around the world .     what I have learn be two thing : one , that the epidemic of violence towards woman be shocking ; it be global ; it be so profound and it be so devastating , and it be so in every little pocket of every little crater , of every little society that we do not even recognize it , because it be become ordinary . this journey have take I to afghanistan , where I have the extraordinary honor and privilege to go into part of afghanistan under the taliban . I be dress in a burqa and I go in with an extraordinary group , call the revolutionary association of the woman of afghanistan . and I see firsthand how woman have be strip of every single right that be possible to strip woman of — from be educate , to be employ , to be actually allow to eat ice cream . for those of you who do not know , it be illegal to eat ice cream under the taliban . and I actually see and meet woman who have be flog for be catch eat vanilla ice cream . I be take to the secret ice cream - eat place in a little town , where we go to a back room , and woman be seat and a curtain be pull around we , and they be serve vanilla ice cream . and woman lift their burqas and eat this ice cream . and I do not think I ever understand pleasure until that moment , and how woman have find a way to keep their pleasure alive .     it have take I , this journey , to islamabad , where I have witness and meet woman with their face melt off . it have take I to juarez , mexico , where I be a week ago , where I have literally be there in parking lot , where bone of woman have wash up and be dump next to coca - cola bottle . it have take I to university all over this country , where girl be date - rape and drug . I have see terrible , terrible , terrible violence . but I have also recognize , in the course of see that violence , that be in the face of thing and see actually what be in front of we be the antidote to depression , and to a feeling that one be worthless and have no value .     because before the " vagina monologue , " I will say that 80 percent of my consciousness be close off to what be really go on in this reality , and that closing - off close off my vitality and my life energy . what have also happen be in the course of these travel — and it be be an extraordinary thing — be that every single place that I have go to in the world , I have meet a new specie . and I really love hear about all these specie at the bottom of the sea . and I be think about how be with these extraordinary people on this particular panel , that it be beneath , beyond and between , and the vagina kind of fit into all those category .     ( laughter )     but one of the thing I 've see be this specie — and it be a specie , and it be a new paradigm , and it do not get report in the press or in the medium because I do not think good news ever be news , and I do not think people who be transform the planet be what get the rating on tv show . but every single country I have be to — and in the last six year , I 've be to about 45 country , and many tiny little village and city and town — I have see something what I 've come to call " vagina warrior . " a " vagina warrior " be a woman , or a vagina - friendly man , who have witness incredible violence or suffer it , and rather than get an ak-47 or a weapon of mass destruction or a machete , they hold the violence in their body ; they grieve it ; they experience it ; and then they go out and devote their life to make sure it do not happen to anybody else .     I have meet these woman everywhere on the planet , and I want to tell a few story , because I believe that story be the way that we transmit information , where it go into our body . and I think one of the thing about be at ted that be be very interesting be that I live in my body a lot , and I do not live in my head very much anymore . and this be a very heady place . and it be be really interesting to be in my head for the last two day ; I 've be very disorient —     ( laughter )     because I think the world , the v - world , be very much in your body . it be a body world , and the specie really exist in the body . and I think there be a real significance in we attach our body to our head , that that separation have create a divide that be often separate purpose from intent . and the connection between body and head often bring those thing into union .     I want to talk about three particular people that I 've meet , vagina warrior , who really transform my understanding of this whole principle and specie , and one be a woman name marsha lopez . marsha lopez be a woman I meet in guatemala . she be 14 year old , and she be in a marriage and her husband be beat she on a regular basis . and she could not get out , because she be addict to the relationship , and she have no money . her sister be young than she , and she apply — we have a " stop rape " contest a few year ago in new york — and she apply , hope that she would become a finalist and she could bring her sister . she do become a finalist ; she bring marsha to new york .     and at that time , we do this extraordinary v - day at madison square garden , where we sell out the entire testosterone - fill dome — 18,000 people stand up to say " yes " to vagina , which be really a pretty incredible transformation . and she come , and she witness this , and she decide that she would go back and leave her husband , and that she would bring v - day to guatemala . she be 21 year old . I go to guatemala and she have sell out the national theater of guatemala . and I watch her walk up on stage in her red short dress and high heel , and she stand there and say , " my name be marsha . I be beat by my husband for five year . he almost murder I . I leave and you can , too . " and the entire 2,000 people go absolutely crazy .     there be a woman name esther chávez who I meet in juarez , mexico . and esther chávez be a brilliant accountant in mexico city . she be 72 year old and she be plan to retire . she go to juarez to take care of an ail aunt , and in the course of it , she begin to discover what be happen to the murder and disappear woman of juarez . she give up her life ; she move to juarez . she start to write the story which document the disappear woman . 300 woman have disappear in a border town because they be brown and poor . there have be no response to the disappearance , and not one person have be hold accountable . she begin to document it . she open a center call casa amiga , and in six year , she have literally bring this to the consciousness of the world . we be there a week ago , when there be 7,000 people in the street , and it be truly a miracle . and as we walk through the street , the people of juarez , who normally do not even come into the street , because the street be so dangerous , literally stand there and weep , to see that other people from the world have show up for that particular community .     there be another woman , name agne . and agne , for I , epitomize what a vagina warrior be . I meet she three year ago in kenya . and agne be mutilate as a little girl ; she be circumcise against her will when she be 10 year old , and she really make a decision that she do not want this practice to continue anymore in her community . so when she get old , she create this incredible thing : it be an anatomical sculpture of a woman 's body , half a woman 's body . and she walk through the rift valley , and she have vagina and vagina replacement part , where she would teach girl and parent and boy and girl what a healthy vagina look like , and what a mutilated vagina look like .     and in the course of her travel — she walk literally for eight year through the rift valley , through dust , through sleep on the ground , because the maasai be nomad , and she would have to find they , and they would move , and she would find they again — she save 1,500 girl from be cut .     and in that time , she create an alternative ritual , which involve girl come of age without the cut . when we meet she three year ago , we say , " what could v - day do for you ? " and she say , " well , if you get I a jeep , I could get around a lot fast . "     ( laughter )     so we buy she a jeep . and in the year that she have the jeep , she save 4,500 girl from be cut . so we say to she , " what else could we do for you ? " she say , " well , eve , if you give I some money , I could open a house and girl could run away , and they could be save . " and I want to tell this little story about my own beginning , because it be very interrelated to happiness and agne .     when I be a little girl — I grow up in a wealthy community ; it be an upper - middle class white community , and it have all the trapping and the look of a perfectly nice , wonderful , great life . and everyone be suppose to be happy in that community , and , in fact , my life be hell . I live with an alcoholic father who beat I and molest I , and it be all inside that . and always as a child I have this fantasy that somebody would come and rescue I . and I actually make up a little character whose name be mr . alligator . I would call he up when thing get really bad , and say it be time to come and pick I up . and I would pack a little bag and wait for mr . alligator to come .     now , mr . alligator never do come , but the idea of mr . alligator come actually save my sanity and make it ok for I to keep go , because I believe , in the distance , there would be someone come to rescue I .     cut to 40 - some odd year later , we go to kenya , and we be walk , we arrive at the opening of this house . and agne have not let I come to the house for day , because they be prepare this whole ritual .     I want to tell you a great story . when agne first start fight to stop female genital mutilation in her community , she have become an outcast , and she be exile and slander , and the whole community turn against she . but be a vagina warrior , she keep go , and she keep commit herself to transform consciousness . and in the maasai community , goat and cow be the most value possession . they be like the mercedes - benz of the rift valley . and she say two day before the house open , two different people arrive to give she a goat each , and she say to I , " I know then that female genital mutilation would end one day in africa . "     anyway , we arrive , and when we arrive , there be hundred of girl dress in red homemade dress — which be the color of the maasai and the color of v - day — and they greet we . they have make up these song that they be singe , about the end of suffering and the end of mutilation , and they walk we down the path . it be a gorgeous day in the african sun , and the dust be fly and the girl be dance , and there be this house , and it say , " v - day safe house for the girl . "     and it hit I in that moment that it have take 47 year , but that mr . alligator have finally show up . and he have show up , obviously , in a form that it take I a long time to understand , which be that when we give in the world what we want the most , we heal the broken part inside each of we .     and I feel , in the last eight year , that this journey — this miraculous vagina journey — have teach I this really simple thing , which be that happiness exist in action ; it exist in tell the truth and say what your truth be ; and it exist in give away what you want the most . and I feel that knowledge and that journey have be an extraordinary privilege , and I feel really bless to have be here today to communicate that to you .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   I would like to talk today about the two big social trend in the come century , and perhaps in the next 10,000 year . but I want to start with my work on romantic love , because that be my most recent work . what I and my colleague do be put 32 people , who be madly in love , into a functional mri brain scanner . 17 who be madly in love and their love be accept ; and 15 who be madly in love and they have just be dump . and so I want to tell you about that first , and then go on into where I think love be go .     ( laughter )     " what ' tis to love ? " shakespeare say . I think our ancestor — I think human being have be wonder about this question since they sit around their campfire or lie and watch the star a million year ago . I start out by try to figure out what romantic love be by look at the last 45 year of the psychological research and as it turn out , there be a very specific group of thing that happen when you fall in love . the first thing that happen be , a person begin to take on what I call , " special meaning . " as a truck driver once say to I , " the world have a new center , and that center be mary anne . "     george bernard shaw say it differently . " love consist of overestimate the difference between one woman and another . " and indeed , that be what we do .     ( laughter )     and then you just focus on this person . you can list what you do not like about they , but then you sweep that aside and focus on what you do . as chaucer say , " love be blind . "     in try to understand romantic love , I decide I would read poetry from all over the world , and I just want to give you one very short poem from eighth - century china , because it be an almost perfect example of a man who be focus totally on a particular woman . it be a little bit like when you be madly in love with somebody and you walk into a parking lot — their car be different from every other car in the parking lot . their wine glass at dinner be different from every other wine glass at the dinner party . and in this case , a man got hook on a bamboo sleep mat .     and it go like this . it be by a guy call yuan zhen . " I can not bear to put away the bamboo sleep mat . the night I bring you home , I watch you roll it out . " he become hooked on a sleep mat , probably because of elevated activity of dopamine in his brain , just like with you and I .     but anyway , not only do this person take on special meaning , you focus your attention on they . you aggrandize they . but you have intense energy . as one polynesian say , " I feel like jump in the sky . " you be up all night . you be walk till dawn . you feel intense elation when thing be go well ; mood swing into horrible despair when thing be go poorly . real dependence on this person . as one businessman in new york say to I , " anything she like , I like . " simple . romantic love be very simple .     you become extremely sexually possessive . you know , if you be just sleep with somebody casually , you do not really care if they be sleep with somebody else . but the moment you fall in love , you become extremely sexually possessive of they . I think there be a darwinian purpose to this . the whole point of this be to pull two people together strongly enough to begin to rear baby as a team .     but the main characteristic of romantic love be craving : an intense craving to be with a particular person , not just sexually , but emotionally . it would be nice to go to bed with they , but you want they to call you on the telephone , to invite you out , etc . , to tell you that they love you . the other main characteristic be motivation . the motor in the brain begin to crank , and you want this person .     and last but not least , it be an obsession . before I put these people in the mri machine , I would ask they all kind of question . but my most important question be always the same . it be : " what percentage of the day and night do you think about this person ? " and indeed , they would say , " all day . all night . I can never stop think about he or she . "     and then , the very last question — I would always have to work myself up to this question , because I be not a psychologist . I do not work with people in any kind of traumatic situation . my final question be always the same . I would say , " would you die for he or she ? " and , indeed , these people would say " yes ! " as if I have ask they to pass the salt . I be just stagger by it .     so we scan their brain , look at a photograph of their sweetheart and look at a neutral photograph , with a distraction task in between . so we could look at the same brain when it be in that heighten state and when it be in a resting state . and we find activity in a lot of brain region . in fact , one of the most important be a brain region that become active when you feel the rush of cocaine . and indeed , that be exactly what happen .     I begin to realize that romantic love be not an emotion . in fact , I have always think it be a series of emotion , from very high to very low . but actually , it be a drive . it come from the motor of the mind , the want part of the mind , the craving part of the mind . the kind of part of the mind when you be reach for that piece of chocolate , when you want to win that promotion at work . the motor of the brain . it be a drive .     and in fact , I think it be more powerful than the sex drive . you know , if you ask somebody to go to bed with you , and they say , " no , thank you , " you certainly do not kill yourself or slip into a clinical depression . but certainly , around the world , people who be reject in love will kill for it . people live for love . they kill for love . they die for love . they have song , poem , novel , sculpture , painting , myth , legend . in over 175 society , people have leave their evidence of this powerful brain system . I have come to think it be one of the most powerful brain system on earth for both great joy and great sorrow .     and I 've also come to think that it be one of three basically different brain system that evolve from mating and reproduction . one be the sex drive : the craving for sexual gratification . w.h . auden call it an " intolerable neural itch , " and indeed , that be what it be . it keep bother you a little bit , like be hungry . the second of these three brain system be romantic love : that elation , obsession of early love . and the third brain system be attachment : that sense of calm and security you can feel for a long - term partner .     and I think that the sex drive evolve to get you out there , look for a whole range of partner . you can feel it when you be just drive along in your car . it can be focus on nobody . I think romantic love evolve to enable you to focus your mating energy on just one individual at a time , thereby conserve mating time and energy . and I think that attachment , the third brain system , evolve to enable you to tolerate this human be at least long enough to raise a child together as a team . so with that preamble , I want to go into discuss the two most profound social trend . one of the last 10,000 year and the other , certainly of the last 25 year , that be go to have an impact on these three different brain system : lust , romantic love and deep attachment to a partner .     the first be woman work , move into the workforce . I 've look at 130 society through the demographic yearbook of the united nations . everywhere in the world , 129 out of 130 of they , woman be not only move into the job market — sometimes very , very slowly , but they be move into the job market — and they be very slowly close that gap between man and woman in term of economic power , health and education . it be very slow .     for every trend on this planet , there be a counter - trend . we all know of they , but nevertheless — the arabs say , " the dog may bark , but the caravan move on . " and , indeed , that caravan be move on . woman be move back into the job market . and I say back into the job market , because this be not new . for million of year , on the grassland of africa , woman commute to work to gather their vegetable . they come home with 60 to 80 percent of the evening meal . the double income family be the standard . and woman be regard as just as economically , socially and sexually powerful as man . in short , we be really move forward to the past .     then , woman 's bad invention be the plow . with the beginning of plow agriculture , man 's role become extremely powerful . woman lose their ancient job as collector , but then with the industrial revolution and the post - industrial revolution they be move back into the job market . in short , they be acquire the status that they have a million year ago , 10,000 year ago , 100,000 year ago . we be see now one of the most remarkable tradition in the history of the human animal . and it be go to have an impact .     I generally give a whole lecture on the impact of woman on the business community . I 'll say just a couple of thing , and then go on to sex and love . there be a lot of gender difference ; anybody who think man and woman be alike simply never have a boy and a girl child . I do not know why they want to think that man and woman be alike . there be much we have in common , but there be a whole lot that we do not have in common .     we be — in the word of ted hughes , " I think that we be like two foot . we need each other to get ahead . " but we do not evolve to have the same brain . and we be find more and more gender difference in the brain . I 'll only just use a couple and then move on to sex and love . one of they be woman 's verbal ability . woman can talk .     woman 's ability to find the right word rapidly , basic articulation go up in the middle of the menstrual cycle , when estrogen levels peak . but even at menstruation , they be well than the average man . woman can talk . they 've be do it for a million year ; word be woman 's tool . they hold that baby in front of their face , cajole it , reprimand it , educate it with word . and , indeed , they be become a very powerful force .     even in place like india and japan , where woman be not move rapidly into the regular job market , they be move into journalism . and I think that the television be like the global campfire . we sit around it and it shape our mind . almost always , when I be on tv , the producer who call I , who negotiate what we be go to say , be a woman . in fact , solzhenitsyn once say , " to have a great writer be to have another government . "     today 54 percent of people who be writer in america be woman . it be one of many , many characteristic that woman have that they will bring into the job market . they 've get incredible people skill , negotiating skill . they be highly imaginative . we now know the brain circuitry of imagination , of long - term planning . they tend to be web thinker . because the female part of the brain be well connect , they tend to collect more piece of datum when they think , put they into more complex pattern , see more option and outcome . they tend to be contextual , holistic thinker , what I call web thinker .     man tend to — and these be average — tend to get rid of what they regard as extraneous , focus on what they do , and move in a more step - by - step thinking pattern . they be both perfectly good way of thinking . we need both of they to get ahead . in fact , there be many more male genius in the world . and there be also many more male idiot in the world .     ( laughter )     when the male brain work well , it work extremely well . and what I really think that we be do be , we be move towards a collaborative society , a society in which the talent of both man and woman be becoming understand and value and employ .     but in fact , woman move into the job market be have a huge impact on sex and romance and family life . foremost , woman be start to express their sexuality . I be always astonish when people come to I and say , " why be it that man be so adulterous ? " " why do you think more man be adulterous than woman ? " " well , man be more adulterous ! " and I say , " who do you think these man be sleep with ? "     ( laughter )     and — basic math !     anyway . in the western world , woman start soon at sex , have more partner , express less remorse for the partner that they do , marry later , have few child , leave bad marriage in order to get good one . we be see the rise of female sexual expression . and , indeed , once again we be move forward to the kind of sexual expression that we probably see on the grassland of africa a million year ago , because this be the kind of sexual expression that we see in hunting and gathering society today .     we be also return to an ancient form of marriage equality . they be now say that the 21st century be go to be the century of what they call the " symmetrical marriage , " or the " pure marriage , " or the " companionate marriage . " this be a marriage between equal , move forward to a pattern that be highly compatible with the ancient human spirit .     we be also see a rise of romantic love . 91 percent of american woman and 86 percent of american man would not marry somebody who have every single quality they be look for in a partner , if they be not in love with that person . people around the world , in a study of 37 society , want to be in love with the person that they marry . indeed , arrange marriage be on their way off this braid of human life .     I even think that marriage might even become more stable because of the second great world trend . the first one be woman move into the job market , the second one be the age world population . they be now say that in america , that middle age should be regard as up to age 85 . because in that high age category of 76 to 85 , as much as 40 percent of people have nothing really wrong with they . so we be see there be a real extension of middle age .     for one of my book , I look at divorce datum in 58 society . and as it turn out , the old you get , the less likely you be to divorce . so the divorce rate right now be stable in america , and it be actually begin to decline . it may decline some more . I would even say that with viagra , estrogen replacement , hip replacement and the incredibly interesting woman — woman have never be as interesting as they be now . not at any time on this planet have woman be so educate , so interesting , so capable . and so I honestly think that if there really be ever a time in human evolution when we have the opportunity to make good marriage , that time be now .     however , there be always kind of complication in this . these three brain system — lust , romantic love and attachment — do not always go together . they can go together , by the way . that be why casual sex be not so casual . with orgasm you get a spike of dopamine . dopamine 's associate with romantic love , and you can just fall in love with somebody who you be just have casual sex with . with orgasm , then you get a real rush of oxytocin and vasopressin — those be associate with attachment . this be why you can feel such a sense of cosmic union with somebody after you 've make love to they .     but these three brain system : lust , romantic love and attachment , be not always connect to each other . you can feel deep attachment to a long - term partner while you feel intense romantic love for somebody else , while you feel the sex drive for people unrelated to these other partner . in short , we be capable of love more than one person at a time . in fact , you can lie in bed at night and swing from deep feeling of attachment for one person to deep feeling of romantic love for somebody else . it be as if there be a committee meeting go on in your head as you be try to decide what to do . so I do not think , honestly , we be an animal that be build to be happy ; we be an animal that be build to reproduce . I think the happiness we find , we make . and I think , however , we can make good relationship with each other .     so I want to conclude with two thing . I want to conclude with a worry , and with a wonderful story . the worry be about antidepressant . over 100 million prescription of antidepressant be write every year in the united states . and these drug be go generic . they be seep around the world . I know one girl who be be on these antidepressant , ssris , serotonin - enhance antidepressant — since she be 13 . she be 23 . she be be on they ever since she be 13 .     I 've get nothing against people who take they short term , when they be go through something horrible . they want to commit suicide or kill somebody else . I would recommend it . but more and more people in the united states be take they long term . and indeed , what these drug do be raise level of serotonin . and by raise level of serotonin , you suppress the dopamine circuit . everybody know that . dopamine be associate with romantic love . not only do they suppress the dopamine circuit , but they kill the sex drive . and when you kill the sex drive , you kill orgasm . and when you kill orgasm , you kill that flood of drug associate with attachment . the thing be connect in the brain . and when you tamper with one brain system , you be go to tamper with another . I be just simply say that a world without love be a deadly place .     so now —     ( applause )     thank you .     I want to end with a story . and then , just a comment . I 've be study romantic love and sex and attachment for 30 year . I be an identical twin ; I be interested in why we be all alike . why you and I be alike , why the iraqis and the japanese and the australian aborigine and the people of the amazon river be all alike . and about a year ago , an internet date service , match.com , come to I and ask I if I would design a new date site for they . I say , " I do not know anything about personality . you know ? I do not know . do you think you 've get the right person ? " they say , " yes . " it get I think about why it be that you fall in love with one person rather than another .     that be my current project ; it will be my next book . there be all kind of reason that you fall in love with one person rather than another . timing be important . proximity be important . mystery be important . you fall in love with somebody who be somewhat mysterious , in part because mystery elevate dopamine in the brain , probably push you over that threshold to fall in love . you fall in love with somebody who fit within what I call your " love map , " an unconscious list of trait that you build in childhood as you grow up . and I also think that you gravitate to certain people , actually , with somewhat complementary brain system . and that be what I be now contribute to this .     but I want to tell you a story , to illustrate . I 've be carry on here about the biology of love . I want to show you a little bit about the culture of it , too , the magic of it . it be a story that be tell to I by somebody who have hear it just from one — probably a true story . it be a graduate student — I be at rutger and my two colleague — art aron be at suny stony brook . that be where we put our people in the mri machine .     and this graduate student be madly in love with another graduate student , and she be not in love with he . and they be all at a conference in beijing . and he know from our work that if you go and do something very novel with somebody , you can drive up the dopamine in the brain , and perhaps trigger this brain system for romantic love .     ( laughter )     so he decide he would put science to work . and he invite this girl to go off on a rickshaw ride with he .     and sure enough — I 've never be in one , but apparently they go all around the bus and the truck and it be crazy and it be noisy and it be exciting . he figure that this would drive up the dopamine , and she would fall in love with he . so off they go and she be squeal and squeeze he and laugh and have a wonderful time . an hour later they get down off of the rickshaw , and she throw her hand up and she say , " be not that wonderful ? " and , " be not that rickshaw driver handsome ! "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     there be magic to love !     ( applause )     but I will end by say that million of year ago , we evolve three basic drive : the sex drive , romantic love and attachment to a long - term partner . these circuit be deeply embed in the human brain . they be go to survive as long as our specie survive on what shakespeare call " this mortal coil . "     thank you .     chris anderson : helen fisher !     ( applause )  
   thank you . it be really an honor and a privilege to be here spend my last day as a teenager . today I want to talk to you about the future , but first I be go to tell you a bit about the past . my story start way before I be bear . my grandmother be on a train to auschwitz , the death camp . and she be go along the track , and the track split . and somehow — we do not really know exactly the whole story — but the train take the wrong track and go to a work camp rather than the death camp . my grandmother survive and marry my grandfather . they be live in hungary , and my mother be bear . and when my mother be two year old , the hungarian revolution be rage , and they decide to escape hungary . they get on a boat , and yet another divergence — the boat be either go to canada or to australia . they get on and do not know where they be go , and end up in canada . so , to make a long story short , they come to canada . my grandmother be a chemist . she work at the banting institute in toronto , and at 44 she die of stomach cancer . I never meet my grandmother , but I carry on her name — her exact name , eva verte — and I like to think I carry on her scientific passion , too .     I find this passion not far from here , actually , when I be nine year old . my family be on a road trip and we be in the grand canyon . and I have never be a reader when I be young — my dad have try I with the hardy boy ; I try nancy draw ; I try all that — and I just do not like read book . and my mother buy this book when we be at the grand canyon call " the hot zone . " it be all about the outbreak of the ebola virus . and something about it just kind of draw I towards it . there be this big sort of bumpy - look virus on the cover , and I just want to read it . I pick up that book , and as we drive from the edge of the grand canyon to big sur , and to , actually , here where we be today , in monterey , I read that book , and from when I be read that book , I know that I want to have a life in medicine . I want to be like the explorer I would read about in the book , who go into the jungle of africa , go into the research lab and just try to figure out what this deadly virus be . so from that moment on , I read every medical book I could get my hand on , and I just love it so much . I be a passive observer of the medical world .     it be not until I enter high school that I think , " maybe now , you know — be a big high school kid — I can maybe become an active part of this big medical world . " I be 14 , and I email professor at the local university to see if maybe I could go work in their lab . and hardly anyone respond . but I mean , why would they respond to a 14 - year - old , anyway ? and I get to go talk to one professor , dr . jacobs , who accept I into the lab . at that time , I be really interested in neuroscience and want to do a research project in neurology — specifically look at the effect of heavy metal on the develop nervous system . so I start that , and work in his lab for a year , and find the result that I guess you would expect to find when you feed fruit fly heavy metal — that it really , really impair the nervous system . the spinal cord have break . the neuron be cross in every which way . and from then I want to look not at impairment , but at prevention of impairment .     so that be what lead I to alzheimer 's . I start read about alzheimer 's and try to familiarize myself with the research , and at the same time when I be in the — I be read in the medical library one day , and I read this article about something call " purine derivative . " and they seem to have cell growth - promote property . and be naive about the whole field , I kind of thought , " oh , you have cell death in alzheimer 's which be cause the memory deficit , and then you have this compound — purine derivative — that be promote cell growth . " and so I think , " maybe if it can promote cell growth , it can inhibit cell death , too . " and so that be the project that I pursue for that year , and it be continue now as well , and find that a specific purine derivative call " guanidine " have inhibit the cell growth by approximately 60 percent . so I present those result at the international science fair , which be just one of the most amazing experience of my life . and there I be award " good in the world in medicine , " which allow I to get in , or at least get a foot in the door of the big medical world .     and from then on , since I be now in this huge exciting world , I want to explore it all . I want it all at once , but know I could not really get that . and I stumble across something call " cancer stem cell . " and this be really what I want to talk to you about today — about cancer . at first when I hear of cancer stem cell , I do not really know how to put the two together . I would hear of stem cell , and I would hear of they as the panacea of the future — the therapy of many disease to come in the future , perhaps . but I would hear of cancer as the most fear disease of our time , so how do the good and bad go together ? last summer I work at stanford university , do some research on cancer stem cell . and while I be do this , I be read the cancer literature , try to — again — familiarize myself with this new medical field . and it seem that tumor actually begin from a stem cell . this fascinate I . the more I read , the more I look at cancer differently and almost become less fearful of it .     it seem that cancer be a direct result to injury . if you smoke , you damage your lung tissue , and then lung cancer arise . if you drink , you damage your liver , and then liver cancer occur . and it be really interesting — there be article correlate if you have a bone fracture , and then bone cancer arise . because what stem cell be — they be these phenomenal cell that really have the ability to differentiate into any type of tissue . so , if the body be sense that you have damage to an organ and then it be initiate cancer , it be almost as if this be a repair response . and the cancer , the body be say the lung tissue be damage , we need to repair the lung . and cancer be originate in the lung try to repair — because you have this excessive proliferation of these remarkable cell that really have the potential to become lung tissue . but it be almost as if the body have originate this ingenious response , but can not quite control it . it have not yet become fine - tune enough to finish what have be initiate . so this really , really fascinate I .     and I really think that we can not think about cancer — let alone any disease — in such black - and - white term . if we eliminate cancer the way we be try to do now , with chemotherapy and radiation , we be bombard the body or the cancer with toxin , or with radiation , try to kill it . it be almost as if we be get back to this starting point . we be remove the cancer cell , but we be reveal the previous damage that the body have try to fix . should not we think about manipulation , rather than elimination ? if somehow we can cause these cell to differentiate — to become bone tissue , lung tissue , liver tissue , whatever that cancer have be put there to do — it would be a repair process . we would end up well than we be before cancer . so , this really change my view of look at cancer . and while I be read all these article about cancer , it seem that the article — a lot of they — focus on , you know , the genetic of breast cancer , and the genesis and the progression of breast cancer — track the cancer through the body , trace where it be , where it go .     but it strike I that I would never hear of cancer of the heart , or cancer of any skeletal muscle for that matter . and skeletal muscle constitute 50 percent of our body , or over 50 percent of our body . and so at first I kind of thought , " well , maybe there be some obvious explanation why skeletal muscle do not get cancer — at least not that I know of . " so , I look far into it , find as many article as I could , and it be amazing — because it turn out that it be very rare . some article even go as far as to say that skeletal muscle tissue be resistant to cancer , and furthermore , not only to cancer , but of metastasis go to skeletal muscle . and what metastasis be be when the tumor — when a piece — break off and travel through the blood stream and go to a different organ . that be what a metastasis be . it be the part of cancer that be the most dangerous . if cancer be localize , we could likely remove it , or somehow — you know , it be contain . it be very contained . but once it start move throughout the body , that be when it become deadly . so the fact that not only do cancer not seem to originate in skeletal muscle , but cancer do not seem to go to skeletal muscle — there seem to be something here . so these article be say , you know , " skeletal — metastasis to skeletal muscle — be very rare . " but it be leave at that . no one seem to be ask why .     so I decide to ask why . at first — the first thing I do be I email some professor who specialize in skeletal muscle physiology , and pretty much say , " hey , it seem like cancer do not really go to skeletal muscle . be there a reason for this ? " and a lot of the reply I get be that muscle be terminally differentiate tissue . mean that you have muscle cell , but they be not divide , so it do not seem like a good target for cancer to hijack . but then again , this fact that the metastasis do not go to skeletal muscle make that seem unlikely . and furthermore , that nervous tissue — brain — get cancer , and brain cell be also terminally differentiate . so I decide to ask why . and here be some of , I guess , my hypothesis that I 'll be start to investigate this may at the sylvester cancer institute in miami . and I guess I 'll keep investigate until I get the answer . but I know that in science , once you get the answer , inevitably you be go to have more question . so I guess you could say that I 'll probably be do this for the rest of my life .     some of my hypothesis be that when you first think about skeletal muscle , there be a lot of blood vessel go to skeletal muscle . and the first thing that make I think be that blood vessel be like highway for the tumor cell . tumor cell can travel through the blood vessel . and you think , the more highway there be in a tissue , the more likely it be to get cancer or to get metastasis . so first of all I think , you know , " would not it be favorable to cancer get to skeletal muscle ? " and as well , cancer tumor require a process call angiogenesis , which be really , the tumor recruit the blood vessel to itself to supply itself with nutrient so it can grow . without angiogenesis , the tumor remain the size of a pinpoint and it be not harmful . so angiogenesis be really a central process to the pathogenesis of cancer .     and one article that really stand out to I when I be just read about this , try to figure out why cancer do not go to skeletal muscle , be that it have report 16 percent of micro - metastasis to skeletal muscle upon autopsy . 16 percent ! mean that there be these pinpoint tumor in skeletal muscle , but only .16 percent of actual metastasis — suggest that maybe skeletal muscle be able to control the angiogenesis , be able to control the tumor recruit these blood vessel . we use skeletal muscle so much . it be the one portion of our body — our heart 's always beat . we be always move our muscle . be it possible that muscle somehow intuitively know that it need this blood supply ? it need to be constantly contract , so therefore it be almost selfish . it be grab its blood vessel for itself . therefore , when a tumor come into skeletal muscle tissue , it can not get a blood supply , and can not grow .     so this suggest that maybe if there be an anti - angiogenic factor in skeletal muscle — or perhaps even more , an angiogenic routing factor , so it can actually direct where the blood vessel grow — this could be a potential future therapy for cancer . and another thing that be really interesting be that there be this whole — the way tumor move throughout the body , it be a very complex system — and there be something call the chemokine network . and chemokine be essentially chemical attractant , and they be the stop and go signal for cancer . so a tumor express chemokine receptor , and another organ — a distant organ somewhere in the body — will have the corresponding chemokine , and the tumor will see these chemokine and migrate towards it . be it possible that skeletal muscle do not express this type of molecule ? and the other really interesting thing be that when skeletal muscle — there be be several report that when skeletal muscle be injure , that be what correlate with metastasis go to skeletal muscle .     and , furthermore , when skeletal muscle be injure , that be what cause chemokine — these signal say , " cancer , you can come to I , " the " go sign " for the tumor — it cause they to highly express these chemokine . so , there be so much interplay here . I mean , there be so many possibility for why tumor do not go to skeletal muscle . but it seem like by investigate , by attack cancer , by search where cancer be not , there have get to be something — there be get to be something — that be make this tissue resistant to tumor . and can we utilize — can we take this property , this compound , this receptor , whatever it be that be control these anti - tumor property and apply it to cancer therapy in general ? now , one thing that kind of tie the resistance of skeletal muscle to cancer — to the cancer as a repair response go out of control in the body — be that skeletal muscle have a factor in it call " myod . " and what myod essentially do be , it cause cell to differentiate into muscle cell . so this compound , myod , have be test on a lot of different cell type and be show to actually convert this variety of cell type into skeletal muscle cell . so , be it possible that the tumor cell be go to the skeletal muscle tissue , but once in contact inside the skeletal muscle tissue , myod act upon these tumor cell and cause they to become skeletal muscle cell ? maybe tumor cell be be disguise as skeletal muscle cell , and this be why it seem as if it be so rare .     it be not harmful ; it have just repair the muscle . muscle be constantly be use — constantly be damage . if every time we tear a muscle or every time we stretch a muscle or move in a wrong way , cancer occur — I mean , everybody would have cancer almost . and I hate to say that . but it seem as though muscle cell , possibly because of all its use , have adapt fast than other body tissue to respond to injury , to fine - tune this repair response and actually be able to finish the process which the body want to finish . I really believe that the human body be very , very smart , and we can not counteract something the body be say to do .     it be different when a bacteria come into the body — that be a foreign object — we want that out . but when the body be actually initiate a process and we be call it a disease , it do not seem as though elimination be the right solution . so even to go from there , it be possible , although far - fetched , that in the future we could almost think of cancer be use as a therapy . if those disease where tissue be deteriorate — for example alzheimer 's , where the brain , the brain cell , die and we need to restore new brain cell , new functional brain cell — what if we could , in the future , use cancer ? a tumor — put it in the brain and cause it to differentiate into brain cell ?     that be a very far - fetched idea , but I really believe that it may be possible . these cell be so versatile , these cancer cell be so versatile — we just have to manipulate they in the right way . and again , some of these may be far - fetched , but I figure if there be anywhere to present far - fetched idea , it be here at ted , so thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   so my grandfather tell I when I be a little girl , " if you say a word often enough , it become you . " and having grow up in a segregated city , baltimore , maryland , I sort of use that idea to go around america with a tape recorder — thank god for technology — to interview people , think that if I walk in their word — which be also why I do not wear shoe when I perform — if I walk in their word , that I could sort of absorb america . I be also inspire by walt whitman , who want to absorb america and have it absorb he .     so these four character be go to be from that work that I 've be do for many year now , and well over , I do not know , a couple of thousand people I 've interview . anybody out here old enough to know stud terkel , that old radio man ? so I think he would be the perfect person to go to to ask about a defining moment in american history . you know , he be " bear in 1912 , the year the titanic sank , great ship every build . hit the tip of an iceberg , and bam , it go down . it go down and I come up . wow , some century . " ( laughter )     so this be his answer about a defining moment in american history . " define moment in american history , I do not think there be one ; you can not say hiroshima , that be a big one — I can not think of any one moment I would say be a defining moment . the gradual slippage — ' slippage ' be the word use by the people in watergate , moral slippage — it be a gradual kind of thing , combination of thing . you see , we also have the technology . I say , less and less the human touch .     " oh , let I kind of tell you a funny little play bit . the atlanta airport be a modern airport , and they should leave the gate there . these train that take you out to a concourse and on to a destination . and these train be smooth , and they be quiet and they be efficient . and there be a voice on the train , you know the voice be a human voice . you see in the old day we have robot , robot imitate human . now we have human imitate robot . so we get this voice on this train : concourse one : omaha , lincoln . concourse two : dallas , fort worth . same voice . just as a train be about to go , a young couple rush in and they be just about to close the pneumatic door . and that voice , without lose a beat , say , ' because of late entry , we be delay 30 second . ' just then , everybody be look at this couple with hateful eye and the couple be go like this , you know , shrink . well , I have happen to have have a couple of drink before boarding — I do that to steel my nerve — and so I imitate a train call , hold my hand on my — ' george orwell , your time have come , ' you see . well , some of you be laugh . everybody laugh when I say that , but not on this train . silence . and so suddenly they be look at I . so here I be with the couple , the three of we shrink at the foot of calvary about to be up , you know .     " just then I see a baby , a little baby in the lap of a mother . I know it be hispanic because she be speak spanish to her companion . so I be go to talk to the baby . so I say to the baby , hold my hand over my mouth because my breath must be 100 proof , I say to the baby , ' sir or madam , what be your considered opinion of the human specie ? ' and the baby look , you know , the way baby look at you clearly , start laugh , start bust out with this crazy little laugh . I say , ' thank god for a human reaction , we have not lose yet . '     " but you see , the human touch , you see , it be disappear . you know , you see , you 've get to question the official truth . you know the thing that be so great about mark twain — you know we honor mark twain , but we do not read he . we read ' huck finn , ' of course , we read ' huck finn ' of course . I mean , huck , of course , be tremendous . remember that great scene on the raft , remember what huck do ? you see , here be huck ; he be an illiterate kid ; he be have no schooling , but there be something in he . and the official truth , the truth be , the law be , that a black man be a property , be a thing , you see .     and huck get on the raft with a property name jim , a slave , see . and he hear that jim be go to go and take his wife and kid and steal they from the woman who own they , and huck say , ' ooh , oh my god , ooh , ooh — that woman , that woman never do anybody any harm . ooh , he be go to steal ; he be go to steal ; he be go to do a terrible thing . ' just then , two slaver catch up , guy chase slave , look for jim . ' anybody up on that raft with you ? ' huck say , ' yeah . ' ' be he black or white ? ' ' white . ' and they go off . and huck say , ' oh my god , oh my god , I lie , I lie , ooh , I do a terrible thing , do a terrible thing — why do I feel so good ? '     " but it be the goodness of huck , that stuff that huck be be make of , you see , all be bury ; it be all be bury . so the human touch , you see , it be disappear . so you ask about a defining moment — be not no define moment in american history for I . it be an accretion of moment that add up to where we be now , where trivium become news . and more and more , less and less awareness of the pain of the other . huh . you know , I do not know if you could use this or not , but I be quote wright morris , a writer from nebraska , who say , ' we be more and more into communication and less and less into communication . ' okay , kid , I get to scram , get to go see my cardiologist . " and that be stud terkel . ( applause )     so , talk about risk taking . I be go to do somebody that nobody like . you know , most actor want to do character that be likeable — well , not always , but the notion , especially at a conference like this , I like to inspire people . but since this be call " risk taking , " I be do somebody who I never do , because she be so unlikeable that one person actually come backstage and tell I to take she out of the show she be in . and I be do she because I think we think of risk , at a conference like this , as a good thing .     but there be certain other connotation to the word " risk , " and the same thing about the word " nature . " what be nature ? maxine greene , who be a wonderful philosopher who be as old as stud , and be the head of a philosophy — great , big philosophy kind of an organization — I go to she and ask she what be the two thing that she do not know , that she still want to know . and she say , " well , personally , I still feel like I have to curtsey when I see the president of my university . and I still feel as though I 've get to get coffee for my male colleague , even though I 've outlive most of they . " and she say , " and then intellectually , I do not know enough about the negative imagination . and september 11th certainly teach we that that be a whole area we do not investigate . "     so this piece be about a negative imagination . it raise question about what nature be , what mother nature be , and about what a risk can be . and I get this in the maryland correctional institute for woman . everything I do be word for word off a tape . and I title thing because I think people speak in organic poem , and this be call " a mirror to her mouth . " and this be an inmate name paulette jenkin .     " I begin to learn how to cover it up , because I do not want nobody to know that this be happen in my home . I want everybody to think we be a normal family . I mean we have all the materialistic thing , but that do not make my child pain any less ; that do not make their fear subside . I run out of excuse about how we get black eye and bust lip and bruise . I do not have no more excuse . and he beat I too . but that do not change the fact that it be a nightmare for my family ; it be a nightmare . and I fail they dramatically , because I allow it to go on and on and on .     " but the night that myesha got kill — and the intensity just grow and grow and grow , until one night we come home from get drug , and he get angry with myesha , and he start beat she , and he put she in a bathtub . oh , he would use a belt . he have a belt because he have this warped perverted thing that myesha be have sex with her little brother and they be fondle each other — that would be his reason . I be just talk about the particular night that she die . and so he put she in the bathtub , and I be in the bedroom with the baby .     " and four month before this happen , four month before myesha die , I think I could really fix this man . so I have a baby by he — insane — think that if I give he his own kid , he would leave mine alone . and it do not work , do not work . and I end up with three child , houston , myesha and dominic , who be four month old when I come to jail .     " and I be in the bedroom . like I say , he have she in the bathroom and he — he — every time he hit she , she would fall . and she would hit her head on the tub . it happen continuously , repeatedly . I could hear it , but I dare not to move . I do not move . I do not even go and see what be happen . I just sit there and listen . and then he put she in the hallway . he tell she , just set there . and so she set there for about four or five hour . and then he tell she , get up . and when she get up , she say she could not see . her face be bruise . she have a black eye . all around her head be just swollen ; her head be about two size of its own size . I tell he , ' let she go to sleep . ' he let she go to sleep .     " the next morning she be dead . he go in to check on she for school , and he get very excited . he say , ' she will not breathe . ' I know immediately that she be dead . I do not even want to accept the fact that she be dead , so I go in and I put a mirror to her mouth — there be no thing , nothing , come out of her mouth . he say , he say , he say , ' we can not , we can not let nobody find out about this . ' he say , ' you 've get to help I . ' I agree . I agree .     " I mean , I 've be keep a secret for year and year and year , so it just seem like second hand to I , just to keep on keep it a secret . so we go to the mall and we tell a police that we have , like , lose she , that she be miss . we tell a security guard that she be miss , though she be not miss . and we tell the security guard what we have put on she and we go home and we dress she in exactly the same thing that we have tell the security guard that we have put on she .     " and then we get the baby and my other child , and we drive out to , like , i-95 . I be so petrified and so numb , all I could look be in the rear - view mirror . and he just lay she right on the shoulder of the highway . my own child , I let that happen to . " so that be an investigation of the negative imagination . ( applause )     when I start this project call " on the road : a search for an american character " with my tape recorder , I think that I be go to go around america and find it in all its aspect — bull rider , cowboy , pig farmer , drum majorette — but I sort of got trip on race relation , because my first big show be a show about a race riot . and so I go to both — two race riot , one of which be the los angeles riot . and this next piece be from that . because this be what I would say I 've learn the most about race relation , from this piece . it be a kind of an aria , I would say , and in many tape that I have .     everybody know that the los angeles riot happen because four cop beat up a black man name rodney king . it be capture on videotape — technology — and it be you all over the world . everybody think the four cop would go to jail . they do not , so there be riot . and what a lot of people forget , be there be a second trial , order by george bush , sr . and that trial come back with two cop go to jail and two cop declare innocent . I be at that trial . and I mean , the people just dance in the street because they be afraid there be go to be another riot . explosion of joy that this verdict have come back this way .     so there be a community that do not — the korean - americans , whose store have be burn to the ground . and so this woman , mrs . young - soon han , I suppose will have teach I the most that I have learn about race . and she ask also a question that stud talk about : this notion of the " official truth , " to question the " official truth . " so what she be question here , she be take a chance and question what justice be in society . and this be call , " swallow the bitterness . "     " I use to believe america be the good . I watch in korea many luxurious hollywood lifestyle movie . I never see any poor man , any black . until 1992 , I use to believe america be the good — I still do ; I do not deny that because I be a victim . but at the end of ' 92 , when we be in such turmoil , and have all the financial problem , and all the mental problem , I begin to really realize that koreans be completely leave out of this society and we be nothing . why ? why do we have to be leave out ? we do not qualify for medical treatment , no food stamp , no gr ,     no welfare , anything . many african - americans who never work get minimum amount of money to survive . we do not get any because we have a car and a house . and we be high taxpayer . where do I find justice ? " ok . ok ? ok . ok . many african - americans probably think that they win by the trial . I be sit here watch they the morning after the verdict , and all the day they be have a party , they celebrate , all of south central , all the church . and they say , ' well , finally justice have be do in this society . ' well , what about victim ' right ? they get their right by destroy innocent korean merchant . they have a lot of respect , as I do , for dr . martin king . he be the only model for black community ; I do not care jesse jackson . he be the model of non - violence , non - violence — and they would all like to be in his spirit .     " but what about 1992 ? they destroy innocent people . and I wonder if that be really justice for they , to get their right in that way . I be swallow the bitterness , sit here alone and watch they . they become so hilarious , but I be happy for they . I be glad for they . at least they get something back , ok . let us just forget about korean victim and other victim who be destroy by they . they fight for their right for over two century , and maybe because they sacrifice other minority , hispanic , asian , we would suffer more in the mainstream . that be why I understand ; that be why I have a mixed feeling about the verdict .     " but I wish that , I wish that , I wish that I could be part of the enjoyment . I wish that I could live together with black people . but after the riot , it be too much difference . the fire be still there . how do you say it ? [ unclear ] . ignite , ignite , ignite fire . ignite fire . it be still there ; it can burst out anytime . " mrs . young - soon han . ( applause )     the other reason that I do not wear shoe be just in case I really feel like I have to cuddle up and get into the foot of somebody , walk really in somebody else 's shoe . and I tell you that in — you know , I do not give you the year , but in ' 79 I think that I be go to go around and find bull rider and pig farmer and people like that , and I got sidetrack on race relation .     finally , I do find a bull rider , two year ago . and I 've be go to the rodeo with he , and we 've bond . and he be the lead in an op - ed I do about the republican convention . he be a republican — I will not say anything about my party affiliation , but anyway — so this be my dear , dear brent williams , and this be on toughness , in case anybody need to know about be tough for the work that you do . I think there be a real lesson in this . and this be call " toughness . "     " well , I be an optimist . I mean basically I be an optimist . I mean , you know , I mean , it be like my wife , jolene , her family 's always say , you know , you ever think he be just a bear loser ? it seem like he have so much bad luck , you know . but then when that bull step on my kidney , you know , I do not lose my kidney — I could have lose my kidney , I keep my kidney , so I do not think I be a bear loser . I think that be good luck . ( laughter )     " and , I mean , funny thing like this happen . I be in a doctor 's office last cat scan , and there be a reader 's digest , october 2002 . it be like , ' seven way to get lucky . ' and it say if you want to get lucky , you know , you 've get to be around positive people . I mean , like even when I tell my wife that you want to come out here and talk to I , she be like , ' she be just talk ; she be just be nice to you . she be not go to do that . '     " and then you call I up and you say you want to come out here and interview I and she go and look you up on the internet . she say , ' look who she be . you be not even go to be able to answer her question . ' ( laughter ) and she be say you be go to make I look like an idiot because I 've never be to college , and I would not be talk professional or anything . I say , ' well look , the woman talk to I for four hour . you know , if I be not talk — you know , like , you know , she want I to talk , I do not think she would even come out here . '     " confidence ? well , I think I ride more out of determination than confidence . I mean , confidence be like , you know , you 've be on that bull before ; you know you can ride he . I mean , confidence be kind of like be cocky , but in a good way . but determination , you know , it be like just , you know , ' fuck the form , get the horn . ' ( laughter ) that be tuff hedeman , in the movie ' 8 second . ' I mean , like , pat o'mealey always say when I be a boy , he say , ' you know , you get more try than any kid I ever see . ' and try and determination be the same thing . determination be , like , you be go to hang on that bull , even if you be ride upside down . determination 's like , you be go to ride till your head hit the back of the dirt .     " freedom ? it would have to be the rodeo .     " beauty ? I do not think I know what beauty be . well , you know , I guess that would have to be the rodeo too . I mean , look how we be , the roughy family , pal around and shake hand and wrestle around I . it be like , you know , rack up our credit card on entry fee and gas . we ride together , we , you know , we , we eat together and we sleep together . I mean , I can not even imagine what it be go to be like the last day I rodeo . I mean , I 'll be alright . I mean , I have my ranch and everything , but I actually do not even want to think the day that come . I mean , I guess it just be like — I guess it be like the day my brother die .     " toughness ? well , we be in west jordan , utah , and this bull shove my face right through the metal shoot in a — you know , bust my face all up and have to go to the hospital . and they have to sew I up and straighten my nose out . and I have to go and ride in the rodeo that night , so I do not want they to put I under anesthesia , or whatever you call it . and so they sew my face up . and then they have to straighten out my nose , and they take these rod and shove they up my nose and go up through my brain and feel like it be come out the top of my head , and everybody say that it should have kill I , but it do not , because I guess I have a high tolerance for pain . ( laughter ) but the good thing be , once they shove those rod up there and straighten my nose out , I could breathe , and I have not be able to breathe since I break my nose in the high school rodeo . "     thank you . ( applause )  
   good morning everyone . first of all , it be be fantastic be here over these past few day . and secondly , I feel it be a great honor to kind of wind up this extraordinary gathering of people , these amazing talk that we 've have . I feel that I 've fit in , in many way , to some of the thing that I 've hear . I come directly here from the deep , deep tropical rainforest in ecuador , where I be out — you could only get there by a plane — with indigenous people with paint on their face and parrot feather on their headdress , where these people be fight to try and keep the oil company , and keep the road , out of their forest . they be fight to develop their own way of live within the forest in a world that be clean , a world that be not contaminate , a world that be not pollute . and what be so amazing to I , and what fit right in with what we be all talk about here at ted , be that there , right in the middle of this rainforest , be some solar panel — the first in that part of ecuador — and that be mainly to bring water up by pump so that the woman would not have to go down . the water be clean , but because they get a lot of battery , they be able to store a lot of electricity . so every house — and there be , I think , eight house in this little community — could have light for , I think it be about half an hour each evening . and there be the chief , in all his regal finery , with a laptop computer . ( laughter ) and this man , he have be outside , but he be go back , and he be say , " you know , we have suddenly jump into a whole new era , and we do not even know about the white man 50 year ago , and now here we be with laptop computer , and there be some thing we want to learn from the modern world . we want to know about health care . we want to know about what other people do — we be interested in it . and we want to learn other language . we want to know english and french and perhaps chinese , and we be good at language . " so there he be with his little laptop computer , but fight against the might of the pressure — because of the debt , the foreign debt of ecuador — fight the pressure of world bank , imf , and of course the people who want to exploit the forest and take out the oil . and so , come directly from there to here . but , of course , my real field of expertise lie in an even different kind of civilization — I can not really call it a civilization . a different way of life , a different being . we 've talk early — this wonderful talk by wade davis about the different culture of the human around the world — but the world be not compose only of human being ; there be also other animal being . and I propose to bring into this ted conference , as I always do around the world , the voice of the animal kingdom . too often we just see a few slide , or a bit of film , but these being have voice that mean something . and so , I want to give you a greeting , as from a chimpanzee in the forest of tanzania — ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh ! ( applause ) I 've be study chimpanzee in tanzania since 1960 . during that time , there have be modern technology that have really transform the way that field biologist do their work . for example , for the first time , a few year ago , by simply collect little fecal sample we be able to have they analyze — to have dna profiling do — so for the first time , we actually know which male chimp be the father of each individual infant . because the chimp have a very promiscuous mating society . so this open up a whole new avenue of research . and we use gsi — geographic whatever it be , gsi — to determine the range of the chimp . and we be use — you can see that I be not really into this kind of stuff — but we be use satellite imagery to look at the deforestation in the area . and of course , there be development in infrare , so you can watch animal at night , and equipment for record by video , and tape recording be get light and well . so in many , many way , we can do thing today that we could not do when I begin in 1960 . especially when chimpanzee , and other animal with large brain , be study in captivity , modern technology be help we to search for the upper level of cognition in some of these non - human animal . so that we know today , they be capable of performance that would have be think absolutely impossible by science when I begin . I think the chimpanzee in captivity who be the most skilled in intellectual performance be one call ai in japan — her name mean love — and she have a wonderfully sensitive partner work with she . she love her computer — she 'll leave her big group , and her run water , and her tree and everything . and she 'll come in to sit at this computer — it be like a video game for a kid ; she be hooked . she be 28 , by the way , and she do thing with her computer screen and a touch pad that she can do fast than most human . she do very complex task , and I have not get time to go into they , but the amazing thing about this female be she do not like make mistake . if she have a bad run , and her score be not good , she 'll come and reach up and tap on the glass — because she can not see the experimenter — which be ask to have another go . and her concentration — she be already concentrate hard for 20 minute or so , and now she want to do it all over again , just for the satisfaction of having do it well . and the food be not important — she do get a tiny reward , like one raisin for a correct response — but she will do it for nothing , if you tell she beforehand . so here we be , a chimpanzee use a computer . chimpanzee , gorilla , orangutan also learn human sign language . but the point be that when I be first in gombe in 1960 — I remember so well , so vividly , as though it be yesterday — the first time , when I be go through the vegetation , the chimpanzee be still run away from I , for the most part , although some be a little bit acclimatize — and I see this dark shape , hunch over a termite mound , and I peer with my binocular . it be , fortunately , one adult male whom I have name david greybeard — and by the way , science at that time be tell I that I should not name the chimp ; they should all have number ; that be more scientific . anyway , david greybeard — and I see that he be pick little piece of grass and use they to fish termite from their underground nest . and not only that — he would sometimes pick a leafy twig and strip the leave — modify an object to make it suitable for a specific purpose — the beginning of tool - making . the reason this be so exciting and such a breakthrough be at that time , it be think that human , and only human , use and make tool . when I be at school , we be define as man , the toolmaker . so that when louis leakey , my mentor , hear this news , he say , " ah , we must now redefine ' man , ' redefine ' tool , ' or accept chimpanzee as human . " ( laughter ) we now know that at gombe alone , there be nine different way in which chimpanzee use different object for different purpose . moreover , we know that in different part of africa , wherever chimp have be study , there be completely different tool - use behavior . and because it seem that these pattern be pass from one generation to the next , through observation , imitation and practice — that be a definition of human culture . what we find be that over these 40 - odd year that I and other have be study chimpanzee and the other great ape , and , as I say , other mammal with complex brain and social system , we have find that after all , there be not a sharp line divide human from the rest of the animal kingdom . it be a very wuzzy line . it be get wuzzi all the time as we find animal do thing that we , in our arrogance , use to think be just human . the chimp — there be no time to discuss their fascinating life — but they have this long childhood , five year of suckle and sleep with the mother , and then another three , four or five year of emotional dependence on she , even when the next child be bear . the importance of learn in that time , when behavior be flexible — and there be an awful lot to learn in chimpanzee society . the long - term affectionate supportive bond that develop throughout this long childhood with the mother , with the brother and sister , and which can last through a lifetime , which may be up to 60 year . they can actually live long than 60 in captivity , so we 've only do 40 year in the wild so far . and we find chimp be capable of true compassion and altruism . we find in their non - verbal communication — this be very rich — they have a lot of sound , which they use in different circumstance , but they also use touch , posture , gesture , and what do they do ? they kiss ; they embrace ; they hold hand . they pat one another on the back ; they swagger ; they shake their fist — the kind of thing that we do , and they do they in the same kind of context . they have very sophisticated cooperation . sometimes they hunt — not that often , but when they hunt , they show sophisticated cooperation , and they share the prey . we find that they show emotion , similar to — maybe sometimes the same — as those that we describe in ourselves as happiness , sadness , fear , despair . they know mental as well as physical suffering . and I do not have time to go into the information that will prove some of these thing to you , save to say that there be very bright student , in the good university , study emotion in animal , study personality in animal . we know that chimpanzee and some other creature can recognize themselves in mirror — " self " as oppose to " other . " they have a sense of humor , and these be the kind of thing which traditionally have be think of as human prerogative . but this teach we a new respect — and it be a new respect not only for the chimpanzee , I suggest , but some of the other amazing animal with whom we share this planet . once we be prepared to admit that after all , we be not the only being with personality , mind and above all feeling , and then we start to think about way we use and abuse so many other sentient , sapient creature on this planet , it really give cause for deep shame , at least for I . so , the sad thing be that these chimpanzee — who 've perhaps teach we , more than any other creature , a little humility — be in the wild , disappear very fast . they be disappear for the reason that all of you in this room know only too well . the deforestation , the growth of human population , need more land . they be disappear because some timber company go in with clear - cutting . they be disappear in the heart of their range in africa because the big multinational logging company have come in and make road — as they want to do in ecuador and other part where the forest remain untouched — to take out oil or timber . and this have lead in congo basin , and other part of the world , to what be know as the bush - meat trade . this mean that although for hundred , perhaps thousand of year , people have live in those forest , or whatever habitat it be , in harmony with their world , just kill the animal they need for themselves and their family — now , suddenly , because of the road , the hunter can go in from the town . they shoot everything , every single thing that move that be big than a small rat ; they sun - dry it or smoke it . and now they 've get transport ; they take it on the logging truck or the mining truck into the town where they sell it . and people will pay more for bush - meat , as it be call , than for domestic meat — it be culturally preferred . and it be not sustainable , and the huge logging camp in the forest be now demand meat , so the pygmy hunter in the congo basin who 've live there with their wonderful way of live for so many hundred of year be now corrupt . they be give weapon ; they shoot for the logging camp ; they get money . their culture be be destroy , along with the animal upon whom they depend . so , when the logging camp move , there be nothing leave . we talk already about the loss of human cultural diversity , and I 've see it happen with my own eye . and the grim picture in africa — I love africa , and what do we see in africa ? we see deforestation ; we see the desert spread ; we see massive hunger ; we see disease and we see population growth in area where there be more people live on a certain piece of land than the land can possibly support , and they be too poor to buy food from elsewhere . be the people that we hear about yesterday , on the easter island , who cut down their last tree — be they stupid ? do not they know what be happen ? of course , but if you 've see the crippling poverty in some of these part of the world it be not a question of " let us leave the tree for tomorrow . " " how be I go to feed my family today ? maybe I can get just a few dollar from this last tree which will keep we go a little bit long , and then we 'll pray that something will happen to save we from the inevitable end . " so , this be a pretty grim picture . the one thing we have , which make we so different from chimpanzee or other living creature , be this sophisticated spoken language — a language with which we can tell child about thing that be not here . we can talk about the distant past , plan for the distant future , discuss idea with each other , so that the idea can grow from the accumulate wisdom of a group . we can do it by talk to each other ; we can do it through video ; we can do it through the write word . and we be abuse this great power we have to be wise steward , and we be destroy the world . in the developed world , in a way , it be bad , because we have so much access to knowledge of the stupidity of what we be do . do you know , we be bring little baby into a world where , in many place , the water be poison they ? and the air be harm they , and the food that be grow from the contaminate land be poison they . and that be not just in the far - away develop world ; that be everywhere . do you know we all have about 50 chemical in our body we do not have about 50 year ago ? and so many of these disease , like asthma and certain kind of cancer , be on the increase around place where our filthy toxic waste be dump . we be harm ourselves around the world , as well as harm the animal , as well as harm nature herself — mother nature , that bring we into be ; mother nature , where I believe we need to spend time , where there be tree and flower and bird for our good psychological development . and yet , there be hundred and hundred of child in the develop world who never see nature , because they be grow up in concrete and all they know be virtual reality , with no opportunity to go and lie in the sun , or in the forest , with the dapple sun - speck come down from the canopy above . as I be travel around the world , you know , I have to leave the forest — that be where I love to be . I have to leave these fascinating chimpanzee for my student and field staff to continue study because , find they dwindle from about two million 100 year ago to about 150,000 now , I know I have to leave the forest to do what I could to raise awareness around the world . and the more I talk about the chimpanzee ' plight , the more I realize the fact that everything be interconnect , and the problem of the develop world so often stem from the greed of the develop world , and everything be join together , and make — not sense , hope lie in sense , you say — it be make a nonsense . how can we do it ? somebody say that yesterday . and as I be travel around , I keep meet young people who have lose hope . they be feel despair , they be feel , " well , it do not matter what we do ; eat , drink and be merry , for tomorrow we die . everything be hopeless — we be always be tell so by the medium . " and then I meet some who be angry , and anger that can turn to violence , and we be all familiar with that . and I have three little grandchild , and when some of these student would say to I at high school or university , they would say , " we be angry , " or " we be fill with despair , because we feel you 've compromise our future , and there be nothing we can do about it . " and I look in the eye of my little grandchild , and think how much we 've harm this planet since I be their age . I feel this deep shame , and that be why in 1991 in tanzania , I start a program that be call root and shoot . there be little brochure all around outside , and if any of you have anything to do with child and care about their future , I beg that you pick up that brochure . and root and shoot be a program for hope . root make a firm foundation . shoot seem tiny , but to reach the sun they can break through brick wall . see the brick wall as all the problem that we 've inflict on this planet . then , you see , it be a message of hope . hundred and thousand of young people around the world can break through , and can make this a well world . and the most important message of root and shoot be that every single individual make a difference . every individual have a role to play . every one of we impact the world around we everyday , and you scientist know that you can not actually — even if you stay in bed all day , you be breathe oxygen and give out co2 , and probably go to the loo , and thing like that — you be make a difference in the world . so , the root and shoot program involve youth in three kind of project . and these be project to make the world around they a well place . one project to show care and concern for your own human community . one for animal , include domestic animal — and I have to say , I learn everything I know about animal behavior even before I get to gombe and the chimp from my dog , rusty , who be my childhood companion . and the third kind of project : something for the local environment . so what the kid do depend first of all , how old be they — and we go now from pre - school right through university . it be go to depend whether they be inner - city or rural . it be go to depend if they be wealthy or impoverished . it be go to depend which part , say , of america they be in . we be in every state now , and the problem in florida be different from the problem in new york . it be go to depend on which country they be in — and we be already in 60 - plus country , with about 5,000 active group — and there be group all over the place that I keep hear about that I 've never even hear of , because the kid be take the program and spread it themselves . why ? because they be buy into it , and they be the one who get to decide what they be go to do . it be not something that their parent tell they , or their teacher tell they . that be effective , but if they decide themselves , " we want to clean this river and put the fish back that use to be there . we want to clear away the toxic soil from this area and have an organic garden . we want to go and spend time with the old people and hear their story and record their oral history . we want to go and work in a dog shelter . we want to learn about animal . we want ... " you know , it go on and on , and this be very hopeful for I . as I travel around the world 300 day a year , everywhere there be a group of root and shoot of different age . everywhere there be child with shine eye say , " look at the difference we 've make . " and now come the technology into it , because with this new way of communicate electronically these kid can communicate with each other around the world . and if anyone be interested to help we , we 've get so many idea but we need help — we need help to create the right kind of system that will help these young people to communicate their excitement . but also — and this be so important — to communicate their despair , to say , " we 've try this and it do not work , and what shall we do ? " and then , lo and behold , there be another group answer these kid who may be in america , or maybe this be a group in israel , say , " yeah , you do it a little bit wrong . this be how you should do it . " the philosophy be very simple . we do not believe in violence . no violence , no bomb , no gun . that be not the way to solve problem . violence lead to violence , at least in my view . so how do we solve ? the tool for solve the problem be knowledge and understanding . know the fact , but see how they fit in the big picture . hard work and persistence — do not give up — and love and compassion lead to respect for all life . how many more minute ? two , one ? chris anderson : one — one to two . jane goodall : two , two , I be go to take two . ( laughter ) be you go to come and drag I off ? ( laughter ) anyway — so basically , root and shoot be begin to change young people 's life . it be what I be devote most of my energy to . and I believe that a group like this can have a very major impact , not just because you can share technology with we , but because so many of you have child . and if you take this program out , and give it to your child , they have such a good opportunity to go out and do good , because they 've get parent like you . and it be be so clear how much you all care about try to make this world a well place . it be very encouraging . but the kid do ask I — and this will not take more than two minute , I promise — the kid say , " dr . jane , do you really have hope for the future ? you travel , you see all these horrible thing happen . " firstly , the human brain — I do not need to say anything about that . now that we know what the problem be around the world , human brain like your be rise to solve those problem . and we 've talk a lot about that . secondly , the resilience of nature . we can destroy a river , and we can bring it back to life . we can see a whole area desolate , and it can be bring back to bloom again , with time or a little help . and thirdly , the last speaker talk about — or the speaker before last , talk about the indomitable human spirit . we be surround by the most amazing people who do thing that seem to be absolutely impossible . nelson mandela — I take a little piece of limestone from robben island prison , where he labor for 27 year , and come out with so little bitterness , he could lead his people from the horror of apartheid without a bloodbath . even after the 11th of september — and I be in new york and I feel the fear — nevertheless , there be so much human courage , so much love and so much compassion . and then as I go around the country after that and feel the fear — the fear that be lead to people feel they could not worry about the environment any more , in case they seem not to be patriotic — and I be try to encourage they , somebody come up with a little quotation from mahatma gandhi , " if you look back through human history , you see that every evil regime have be overcome by good . " and just after that a woman bring I this little bell , and I want to end on this note . she say , " if you be talk about hope and peace , re this . this bell be make from metal from a defused landmine , from the kill field of pol pot — one of the most evil regime in human history — where people be now begin to put their life back together after the regime have crumble . so , yes , there be hope , and where be the hope ? be it out there with the politician ? it be in our hand . it be in your hand and my hand and those of our child . it be really up to we . we be the one who can make a difference . if we lead life where we consciously leave the light possible ecological footprint , if we buy the thing that be ethical for we to buy and do not buy the thing that be not , we can change the world overnight . thank you .  
   I work with a species call " bonobo . " and I be happy most of the time , because I think this be the happy specie on the planet . it be kind of a well - keep secret . this specie live only in the congo . and they be not in too many zoo , because of their sexual behavior . their sexual behavior be too human - like for most of we to be comfortable with .     ( laughter )     but —     ( laughter )     actually , we have a lot to learn from they , because they be a very egalitarian society and they be a very empathetic society . and sexual behavior be not confine to one aspect of their life that they sort of set aside . it permeate their entire life . and it be use for communication . and it be use for conflict resolution . and I think perhaps somewhere in our history we sort of , divide our life up into lot of part . we divide our world up with lot of category . and so everything sort of have a place that it have to fit . but I do not think that we be that way initially .     there be many people who think that the animal world be hard - wire and that there be something very , very special about man . maybe it be his ability to have causal thought . maybe it be something special in his brain that allow he to have language . maybe it be something special in his brain that allow he to make tool or to have mathematic . well , I do not know . there be tasmanian who be discover around the 1600 and they have no fire . they have no stone tool . to our knowledge they have no music . so when you compare they to the bonobo , the bonobo be a little hairy . he do not stand quite as upright . but there be a lot of similarity . and I think that as we look at culture , we kind of come to understand how we get to where we be . and I do not really think it be in our biology ; I think we 've attribute it to our biology , but I do not really think it be there .     so what I want to do now be introduce you to a species call the bonobo . this be kanzi . he be a bonobo . right now , he be in a forest in georgia . his mother originally come from a forest in africa . and she come to we when she be just at puberty , about six or seven year of age .     now this show a bonobo on your right , and a chimpanzee on your left . clearly , the chimpanzee have a little bit hard time of walk . the bonobo , although short than we and their arm still long , be more upright , just as we be . this show the bonobo compare to an australopithecine like lucy . as you can see , there be not a lot of difference between the way a bonobo walk and the way an early australopithecine would have walk . as they turn toward we you 'll see that the pelvic area of early australopithecine be a little flat and do not have to rotate quite so much from side to side . so the — the bipedal gait be a little easy . and now we see all four .     video : narrator : the wild bonobo live in central africa , in the jungle encircle by the congo river . canopy tree as tall as 40 meter , 130 foot , grow densely in the area . it be a japanese scientist who first undertake serious field study of the bonobo , almost three decade ago . bonobo be build slightly small than the chimpanzee . slim - bodied , bonobo be by nature very gentle creature . long and careful study have report many new finding on they . one discovery be that wild bonobo often walk bidpedally . what be more , they be able to walk upright for long distance . susan savage - rumbaugh ( video ): let us go say hello to austin first and then go to the a frame .     ss : this be kanzi and I , in the forest . none of the thing you will see in this particular video be train . none of they be trick . you all happen to be capture on film spontaneously , by nhk of japan . we have eight bonobo .     video : look at all this stuff that be here for our campfire .     ss : an entire family at our research centre .     video : you go to help get some stick ? good . we need more stick , too . I have a light in my pocket if you need one . that be a wasps ' nest . you can get it out . I hope I have a light . you can use the light to start the fire .     ss : so kanzi be very interested in fire . he do not do it yet without a light , but I think if he see someone do it , he might be able to do — make a fire without a light . he be learn about how to keep a fire go . he be learn the use for a fire , just by watch what we do with fire .     ( laughter )     this be a smile on the face of a bonobo . these be happy vocalization .     video : you be happy . you be very happy about this part . you 've get to put some water on the fire . you see the water ? good job .     ss : forgot to zip up the back half of his backpack . but he like to carry thing from place to place .     video : austin , I hear you say " austin . "     ss : he talk to other bonobo at the lab , long - distance , far than we can hear . this be his sister . this be her first time to try to drive a golf cart .     video : goodbye .     ( laughter )     ss : she be get the pedal down , but not the wheel . she switch from reverse to forward and she hold onto the wheel , rather than turn it .     ( laughter )     like we , she know that that individual in the mirror be she .     ( music )     video : narrator : by raise bonobo in a culture that be both bonobo and human , and document their development across two decade , scientist be explore how cultural force     ( laughter )     may have operate during human evolution .     his name be nyota . it mean " star " in swahili .     ( music )     panbanisha be try to give nyota a haircut with a pair of scissor . in the wild , the parent bonobo be know to groom its offspring . here panbanisha use scissor , instead of her hand , to groom nyota . very impressive . subtle maneuvering of the hand be require to perform delicate task like this . nyota try to imitate panbanisha by use the scissor himself . realize that nyota might get hurt , panbanisha , like any human mother , carefully tug to get the scissor back .     he can now cut through tough animal hide .     ss : kanzi 's learn to make stone tool .     video : kanzi now make his tool , just as our ancestor may have make they , two - and - a - half million year ago — by hold the rock in both hand , to strike one against the other . he have learn that by use both hand and aim his glance blow , he can make much large , sharp flake . kanzi choose a flake he think be sharp enough . the tough hide be difficult to cut , even with a knife . the rock that kanzi be use be extremely hard and ideal for stone tool making , but difficult to handle , require great skill . kanzi 's rock be from gona , ethiopia and be identical to that use by our african ancestor two - and - a - half million year ago . these be the rock kanzi use and these be the flake he make . the flat sharp edge be like knife blade . compare they to the tool our ancestor use ; they bear a striking resemblance to kanzi 's .     panbanisha be long to go for a walk in the wood . she keep stare out the window .     ss : this be — let I show you something we do not think they would do .     video : for several day now , panbanisha have not be outside .     ss : I normally talk about language .     video : then panbanisha do something unexpected .     ss : but since I be advise not to do what I normally do , I have not tell you that these ape have language . it be a geometric language .     video : she take a piece of chalk and begin write something on the floor . what be she write ?     ss : she be also say the name of that , with her voice .     video : now she come up to dr . sue and start write again .     ss : these be her symbol on her keyboard .     ( music )     they speak when she touch they .     video : panbanisha be communicate to dr . sue where she want to go . " a frame " represent a hut in the wood . compare the chalk write with the lexigram on the keyboard . panbanisha begin write the lexigram on the forest floor . ss ( video ): very nice . beautiful , panbanisha .     ss : at first we do not really realize what she be do , until we stand back and look at it and rotate it .     video : this lexigram also refer to a place in the wood . the curve line be very similar to the lexigram . the next symbol panbanisha write represent " collar . " it indicate the collar that panbanisha must wear when she go out .     ss : that be an institutional requirement .     video : this symbol be not as clear as the other , but one can see panbanisha be try to produce a curve line and several straight line . researcher begin to record what panbanisha say , by write lexigram on the floor with chalk . panbanisha watch . soon she begin to write as well . the bonobo 's ability have stun scientist around the world . how do they develop ?     ss ( video ): we find that the most important thing for permit bonobo to acquire language be not to teach they . it be simply to use language around they , because the drive force in language acquisition be to understand what other , that be important to you , be say to you . once you have that capacity , the ability to produce language come rather naturally and rather freely . so we want to create an environment in which bonobo , like all of the individual with whom they be interact — we want to create an environment in which they have fun , and an environment in which the other be meaningful individual for they . narrator : this environment bring out unexpected potential in kanzi and panbanisha .     panbanisha be enjoy play her harmonica , until nyota , now one year old , steal it . then he peer eagerly into his mother 's mouth . be he look for where the sound come from ? dr . sue think it be important to allow such curiosity to flourish . this time panbanisha be play the electric piano . she be not force to learn the piano ; she see a researcher play the instrument and take an interest .     researcher : go ahead . go ahead . I be listen . do that real fast part that you do . yeah , that part .     narrator : kanzi play the xylophone ; use both hand he enthusiastically accompany dr . sue 's singing . kanzi and panbanisha be stimulate by this fun - fill environment , which promote the emergence of these cultural capability .     ( laughter )     researcher : ok , now get the monster . get they . take the cherry too . now watch out , stay away from they now . now you can chase they again . time to chase they . now you have to stay away . get away . run away . run . now we can chase they again . go get they . oh no ! good kanzi . very good . thank you so much .     narrator : none of we , bonobo or human , can possibly even imagine ?     ss : so we have a bi - species environment , we call it a " panhomoculture . " we be learn how to become like they . we be learn how to communicate with they , in really high - pitch tone . we be learn that they probably have a language in the wild . and they be learn to become like we . because we believe that it be not biology ; it be culture . so we be share tool and technology and language with another specie .     thank you .  
   if you would like to learn how to play the lobster , we have some here . and that be not a joke , we really do . so come up afterwards and I 'll show you how to play a lobster .     so , actually , I start work on what be call the mantis shrimp a few year ago because they make sound . this be a recording I make of a mantis shrimp that be find off the coast of california . and while that be an absolutely fascinating sound , it actually turn out to be a very difficult project . and while I be struggle to figure out how and why mantis shrimp , or stomatopod , make sound , I start to think about their appendage . and mantis shrimp be call " mantis shrimp " after the pray mantis , which also have a fast feeding appendage . and I start to think , well , maybe it will be interesting , while listen to their sound , to figure out how these animal generate very fast feeding strike . and so today I 'll talk about the extreme stomatopod strike , work that I 've do in collaboration with wyatt korff and roy caldwell .     so , mantis shrimp come in two variety : there be spearer and smasher . and this be a spear mantis shrimp , or stomatopod . and he live in the sand , and he catch thing that go by overhead . so , a quick strike like that . and if we slow it down a bit , this be the mantis shrimp — the same specie — record at 1,000 frame a second , play back at 15 frame per second . and you can see it be just a really spectacular extension of the limb , explode upward to actually just catch a dead piece of shrimp that I have offer it . now , the other type of mantis shrimp be the smasher stomatopod , and these guy open up snail for a living . and so this guy get the snail all set up and give it a good whack .     ( laughter )     so , I 'll play it one more time . he wiggle it in place , tug it with his nose , and smash . and a few smash later , the snail be break open , and he be get a good dinner . so , the smasher raptorial appendage can stab with a point at the end , or it can smash with the heel . and today I 'll talk about the smash type of strike .     and so the first question that come to mind be , well , how fast do this limb move ? because it be move pretty darn fast on that video . and I immediately come upon a problem . every single high - speed video system in the biology department at berkeley be not fast enough to catch this movement . we simply could not capture it on video . and so this have I stymie for quite a long period of time . and then a bbc crew come cruise through the biology department , look for a story to do about new technology in biology . and so we strike up a deal . I say , " well , if you guy rent the high - speed video system that could capture these movement , you guy can film we collect the datum . " and believe it or not , they go for it . ( laughter ) so we get this incredible video system . it be very new technology — it just come out about a year ago — that allow you to film at extremely high speed in low light . and low light be a critical issue with filming animal , because if it be too high , you fry they . ( laughter )     so this be a mantis shrimp . there be the eye up here , and there be that raptorial appendage , and there be the heel . and that thing be go to swing around and smash the snail . and the snail 's wire to a stick , so he be a little bit easy to set up the shot . and — yeah .     ( laughter )     I hope there be not any snail right activist around here .     ( laughter )     so this be film at 5,000 frame per second , and I be play it back at 15 . and so this be slow down 333 time . and as you 'll notice , it be still pretty gosh darn fast slow down 333 time . it be an incredibly powerful movement . the whole limb extend out . the body flex backwards — just a spectacular movement . and so what we do be , we take a look at these video , and we measure how fast the limb be move to get back to that original question . and we be in for our first surprise . so what we calculate be that the limb be move at the peak speed range from 10 meter per second all the way up to 23 meter per second . and for those of you who prefer mile per hour , that be over 45 mile per hour in water . and this be really darn fast . in fact , it be so fast we be able to add a new point on the extreme animal movement spectrum . and mantis shrimp be officially the fast measure feeding strike of any animal system . so our first surprise .     ( applause )     so that be really cool and very unexpected . so , you might be wonder , well , how do they do it ? and actually , this work be do in the 1960 by a famous biologist name malcolm burrow . and what he show in mantis shrimp be that they use what be call a " catch mechanism , " or " click mechanism . " and what this basically consist of be a large muscle that take a good long time to contract , and a latch that prevent anything from move . so the muscle contract , and nothing happen . and once the muscle 's contract completely , everything be store up — the latch fly upward , and you 've get the movement . and that be basically what be call a " power amplification system . " it take a long time for the muscle to contract , and a very short time for the limb to fly out . and so I think that this be sort of the end of the story . this be how mantis shrimp make these very fast strike .     but then I take a trip to the national museum of natural history . and if any of you ever have a chance , backstage of the national museum of natural history be one of the world 's good collection of preserve mantis shrimp . and what —     ( laughter )     this be serious business for I .     ( laughter )     so , this — what I see , on every single mantis shrimp limb , whether it be a spearer or a smasher , be a beautiful saddle - shape structure right on the top surface of the limb . and you can see it right here . it just look like a saddle you would put on a horse . it be a very beautiful structure . and it be surround by membranous area . and those membranous area suggest to I that maybe this be some kind of dynamically flexible structure . and this really sort of have I scratch my head for a while . and then we do a series of calculation , and what we be able to show be that these mantis shrimp have to have a spring . there need to be some kind of spring - load mechanism in order to generate the amount of force that we observe , and the speed that we observe , and the output of the system . so we think , ok , this must be a spring — the saddle could very well be a spring . and we go back to those high - speed video again , and we could actually visualize the saddle compress and extend . and I 'll just do that one more time . and then if you take a look at the video — it be a little bit hard to see — it be outline in yellow . the saddle be outline in yellow . you can actually see it extend over the course of the strike , and actually hyperextend . so , we 've have very solid evidence show that that saddle - shape structure actually compress and extend , and do , in fact , function as a spring .     the saddle - shape structure be also know as a " hyperbolic paraboloid surface , " or an " anticlastic surface . " and this be very well know to engineer and architect , because it be a very strong surface in compression . it have curve in two direction , one curve upward and opposite transverse curve down the other , so any kind of perturbation spread the force over the surface of this type of shape . so it be very well know to engineer , not as well know to biologist . it be also know to quite a few people who make jewelry , because it require very little material to build this type of surface , and it be very strong . so if you be go to build a thin gold structure , it be very nice to have it in a shape that be strong .     now , it be also know to architect . one of the most famous architect be eduardo catalano , who popularize this structure . and what be show here be a saddle - shape roof that he build that be 87 and a half foot spanwise . it be two and a half inch thick , and support at two point . and one of the reason why he design roof this way be because it be — he find it fascinating that you could build such a strong structure that be make of so few material and can be support by so few point . and all of these be the same principle that apply to the saddle - shape spring in stomatopod . in biological system it be important not to have a whole lot of extra material requirement for build it . so , very interesting parallel between the biological and the engineering world . and interestingly , this turn out — the stomatopod saddle turn out to be the first describe biological hyperbolic paraboloid spring . that be a bit long , but it be sort of interesting .     so the next and final question be , well , how much force do a mantis shrimp produce if they be able to break open snail ? and so I wire up what be call a load cell . a load cell measure force , and this be actually a piezoelectronic load cell that have a little crystal in it . and when this crystal be squeeze , the electrical property change and it — which — in proportion to the force that go in . so these animal be wonderfully aggressive , and be really you all the time . and so all I have to do be actually put a little shrimp paste on the front of the load cell , and they would smash away at it . and so this be just a regular video of the animal just smash the heck out of this load cell . and we be able to get some force measurement out . and again , we be in for a surprise .     I purchase a 100 - pound load cell , thinking , no animal could produce more than 100 pound at this size of an animal . and what do you know ? they immediately overload the load cell . so these be actually some old datum where I have to find the small animal in the lab , and we be able to measure force of well over 100 pound generate by an animal about this big . and actually , just last week I get a 300 - pound load cell up and run , and I 've clock these animal generate well over 200 pound of force . and again , I think this will be a world record . I have to do a little bit more background reading , but I think this will be the large amount of force produce by an animal of a give — per body mass . so , really incredible force . and again , that bring we back to the importance of that spring in store up and release so much energy in this system . but that be not the end of the story .     now , thing — I be make this sound very easy , this be actually a lot of work . and I get all these force measurement , and then I go and look at the force output of the system . and this be just very simple — time be on the x - axis and the force be on the y - axis . and you can see two peak . and that be what really get I puzzled . the first peak , obviously , be the limb hit the load cell . but there be a really large second peak half a millisecond later , and I do not know what that be . so now , you would expect a second peak for other reason , but not half a millisecond later . again , go back to those high - speed video , there be a pretty good hint of what might be go on . here be that same orientation that we see early . there be that raptorial appendage — there be the heel , and it be go to swing around and hit the load cell . and what I would like you to do in this shot be keep your eye on this , on the surface of the load cell , as the limb comes fly through . and I hope what you be able to see be actually a flash of light .     audience : wow .     sheila patek : and so if we just take that one frame , what you can actually see there at the end of that yellow arrow be a vapor bubble . and what that be , be cavitation . and cavitation be an extremely potent fluid dynamic phenomenon which occur when you have area of water move at extremely different speed . and when this happen , it can cause area of very low pressure , which result in the water literally vaporize . and when that vapor bubble collapse , it emit sound , light and heat , and it be a very destructive process . and so here it be in the stomatopod . and again , this be a situation where engineer be very familiar with this phenomenon , because it destroy boat propeller . people have be struggle for year to try and design a very fast rotate boat propeller that do not cavitate and literally wear away the metal and put hole in it , just like these picture show .     so this be a potent force in fluid system , and just to sort of take it one step far , I be go to show you the mantis shrimp approach the snail . this be take at 20,000 frame per second , and I have to give full credit to the bbc cameraman , tim green , for set this shot up , because I could never have do this in a million year — one of the benefit of work with professional cameraman . you can see it come in , and an incredible flash of light , and all this cavitation spread over the surface of the snail . so really , just an amazing image , slow down extremely , to extremely slow speed . and again , we can see it in slightly different form there , with the bubble form and collapse between those two surface . in fact , you might have even see some cavitation go up the edge of the limb .     so to solve this quandary of the two force peak : what I think be go on be : that first impact be actually the limb hit the load cell , and the second impact be actually the collapse of the cavitation bubble . and these animal may very well be make use of not only the force and the energy store with that specialized spring , but the extreme of the fluid dynamic . and they might actually be make use of fluid dynamic as a second force for break the snail . so , really fascinating double whammy , so to speak , from these animal .     so , one question I often get after this talk — so I figure I would answer it now — be , well , what happen to the animal ? because obviously , if it be break snail , the poor limb must be disintegrate . and indeed it do . that be the smash part of the heel on both these image , and it get wear away . in fact , I 've see they wear away their heel all the way to the flesh . but one of the convenient thing about be an arthropod be that you have to molt . and every three month or so these animal molt , and they build a new limb and it be no problem . very , very convenient solution to that particular problem .     so , I would like to end on sort of a wacky note .     ( laughter )     maybe this be all wacky to folk like you , I do not know .     ( laughter )     so , the saddle — that saddle - shape spring — have actually be well known to biologist for a long time , not as a spring but as a visual signal . and there be actually a spectacular color dot in the center of the saddle of many specie of stomatopod . and this be quite interesting , to find evolutionary origin of visual signal on what be really , in all specie , their spring . and I think one explanation for this could be go back to the molting phenomenon .     so these animal go into a molting period where they be unable to strike — their body become very soft . and they be literally unable to strike or they will self - destruct . this be for real . and what they do be , up until that time period when they can not strike , they become really obnoxious and awful , and they strike everything in sight ; it do not matter who or what . and the second they get into that time point when they can not strike any more , they just signal . they wave their leg around . and it be one of the classic example in animal behavior of bluffing . it be a well - establish fact of these animal that they actually bluff . they can not actually strike , but they pretend to . and so I be very curious about whether those color dot in the center of the saddle be convey some kind of information about their ability to strike , or their strike force , and something about the time period in the molting cycle . so sort of an interesting strange fact to find a visual structure right in the middle of their spring .     so to conclude , I mostly want to acknowledge my two collaborator , wyatt korff and roy caldwell , who work closely with I on this . and also the miller institute for basic research in science , which give I three year of funding to just do science all the time , and for that I be very grateful . thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   it be a thrill to be here at a conference that be devoted to " inspire by nature " — you can imagine . and I be also thrilled to be in the foreplay section . do you notice this section be foreplay ? because I get to talk about one of my favorite critter , which be the western grebe . you have not live until you 've see these guy do their courtship dance . I be on bowman lake in glaci national park , which be a long , skinny lake with sort of mountain upside down in it , and my partner and I have a rowing shell . and so we be row , and one of these western grebe come along . and what they do for their courtship dance be , they go together , the two of they , the two mate , and they begin to run underwater . they paddle fast , and fast , and fast , until they be go so fast that they literally lift up out of the water , and they be stand upright , sort of paddle the top of the water . and one of these grebe come along while we be row . and so we be in a skull , and we be move really , really quickly . and this grebe , I think , sort of , mistake we for a prospect , and start to run along the water next to we , in a courtship dance — for mile . it would stop , and then start , and then stop , and then start . now that be foreplay . ( laughter )     I come this close to change specie at that moment . obviously , life can teach we something in the entertainment section . life have a lot to teach we . but what I would like to talk about today be what life might teach we in technology and in design . what be happen since the book come out — the book be mainly about research in biomimicry — and what be happen since then be architect , designer , engineer — people who make our world — have start to call and say , we want a biologist to sit at the design table to help we , in real time , become inspire . or — and this be the fun part for I — we want you to take we out into the natural world . we 'll come with a design challenge and we find the champion adapter in the natural world , who might inspire we .     so this be a picture from a galapagos trip that we take with some wastewater treatment engineer ; they purify wastewater . and some of they be very resistant , actually , to be there . what they say to we at first be , you know , we already do biomimicry . we use bacteria to clean our water . and we say , well , that be not exactly be inspire by nature . that be bioprocesse , you know ; that be bio - assist technology : use an organism to do your wastewater treatment be an old , old technology call " domestication . " this be learn something , learn an idea , from an organism and then apply it . and so they still be not get it .     so we go for a walk on the beach and I say , well , give I one of your big problem . give I a design challenge , sustainability speed bump , that be keep you from be sustainable . and they say scaling , which be the build - up of mineral inside of pipe . and they say , you know what happen be , mineral — just like at your house — mineral build up . and then the aperture close , and we have to flush the pipe with toxin , or we have to dig they up . so if we have some way to stop this scaling — and so I pick up some shell on the beach . and I ask they , what be scale ? what be inside your pipe ? and they say , calcium carbonate . and I say , that be what this be ; this be calcium carbonate .     and they do not know that . they do not know that what a seashell be , it be template by protein , and then ion from the seawater crystallize in place to create a shell . so the same sort of a process , without the protein , be happen on the inside of their pipe . they do not know . this be not for lack of information ; it be a lack of integration . you know , it be a silo , people in silo . they do not know that the same thing be happen . so one of they think about it and say , ok , well , if this be just crystallization that happen automatically out of seawater — self - assembly — then why be not shell infinite in size ? what stop the scaling ? why do not they just keep on go ? and I say , well , in the same way that they exude a protein and it start the crystallization — and then you all sort of lean in — they let go of a protein that stop the crystallization . it literally adhere to the grow face of the crystal . and , in fact , there be a product call tpa that be mimic that protein — that stop - protein — and it be an environmentally friendly way to stop scale in pipe .     that change everything . from then on , you could not get these engineer back in the boat . the first day they would take a hike , and it be , click , click , click , click . five minute later they be back in the boat . we be do . you know , I 've see that island . after this , they be crawl all over . they would snorkel for as long as we would let they snorkel . what have happen be that they realize that there be organism out there that have already solve the problem that they have spend their career try to solve .     learn about the natural world be one thing ; learn from the natural world — that be the switch . that be the profound switch . what they realize be that the answer to their question be everywhere ; they just need to change the lense with which they see the world . 3.8 billion year of field - testing . 10 to 30 — craig venter will probably tell you ; I think there be a lot more than 30 million — well - adapt solution . the important thing for I be that these be solution solve in context . and the context be the earth — the same context that we be try to solve our problem in . so it be the conscious emulation of life 's genius . it be not slavishly mimic — although al be try to get the hairdo go — it be not a slavish mimicry ; it be take the design principle , the genius of the natural world , and learn something from it .     now , in a group with so many it people , I do have to mention what I be not go to talk about , and that be that your field be one that have learn an enormous amount from live thing , on the software side . so there be computer that protect themselves , like an immune system , and we be learn from gene regulation and biological development . and we be learn from neural net , genetic algorithm , evolutionary computing . that be on the software side . but what be interesting to I be that we have not look at this , as much . I mean , these machine be really not very high tech in my estimation in the sense that there be dozen and dozen of carcinogen in the water in silicon valley . so the hardware be not at all up to snuff in term of what life would call a success . so what can we learn about make — not just computer , but everything ? the plane you come in , car , the seat that you be sit on . how do we redesign the world that we make , the human - make world ? more importantly , what should we ask in the next 10 year ? and there be a lot of cool technology out there that life have .     what be the syllabus ? three question , for I , be key . how do life make thing ? this be the opposite ; this be how we make thing . it be call heat , beat and treat — that be what material scientist call it . and it be carve thing down from the top , with 96 percent waste leave over and only 4 percent product . you heat it up ; you beat it with high pressure ; you use chemical . ok . heat , beat and treat .     life can not afford to do that . how do life make thing ? how do life make the most of thing ? that be a geranium pollen . and its shape be what give it the function of be able to tumble through air so easily . look at that shape . life add information to matter . in other word : structure . it give it information . by add information to matter , it give it a function that be different than without that structure . and thirdly , how do life make thing disappear into system ? because life do not really deal in thing ; there be no thing in the natural world divorce from their system . really quick syllabus . as I be read more and more now , and follow the story , there be some amazing thing come up in the biological science . and at the same time , I be listen to a lot of business and find what their sort of grand challenge be . the two group be not talk to each other . at all .     what in the world of biology might be helpful at this juncture , to get we through this sort of evolutionary knothole that we be in ? I be go to try to go through 12 , really quickly .     one that be exciting to I be self - assembly . now , you 've hear about this in term of nanotechnology . back to that shell : the shell be a self - assemble material . on the low left there be a picture of mother of pearl form out of seawater . it be a layered structure that be mineral and then polymer , and it make it very , very tough . it be twice as tough as our high - tech ceramic . but what be really interesting : unlike our ceramic that be in kiln , it happen in seawater . it happen near , in and near , the organism 's body . this be sandia national lab . a guy name jeff brinker have find a way to have a self - assemble coding process . imagine be able to make ceramic at room temperature by simply dip something into a liquid , lift it out of the liquid , and have evaporation force the molecule in the liquid together , so that they jigsaw together in the same way as this crystallization work . imagine make all of our hard material that way . imagine spray the precursor to a pv cell , to a solar cell , onto a roof , and have it self - assemble into a layered structure that harvest light .     here be an interesting one for the it world : bio - silicon . this be a diatom , which be make of silicate . and so silicon , which we make right now — it be part of our carcinogenic problem in the manufacture of our chip — this be a bio - mineralization process that be now be mimic . this be at uc santa barbara . look at these diatom . this be from ernst haeckel 's work . imagine be able to — and , again , it be a template process , and it solidify out of a liquid process — imagine be able to have that sort of structure come out at room temperature . imagine be able to make perfect lense . on the left , this be a brittle star ; it be cover with lense that the people at lucent technology have find have no distortion whatsoever . it be one of the most distortion - free lense we know of . and there be many of they , all over its entire body . what be interesting , again , be that it self - assemble . a woman name joanna aizenberg , at lucent , be now learn to do this in a low - temperature process to create these sort of lense . she be also look at fiber optic . that be a sea sponge that have a fiber optic . down at the very base of it , there be fiber optic that work well than ours , actually , to move light , but you can tie they in a knot ; they be incredibly flexible .     here be another big idea : co2 as a feedstock . a guy name geoff coate , at cornell , say to himself , you know , plant do not see co2 as the big poison of our time . we see it that way . plant be busy make long chain of starch and glucose , right , out of co2 . he be find a way — he be find a catalyst — and he be find a way to take co2 and make it into polycarbonate . biodegradable plastic out of co2 — how plant - like .     solar transformation : the most exciting one . there be people who be mimic the energy - harvesting device inside of purple bacterium , the people at asu . even more interesting , lately , in the last couple of week , people have see that there be an enzyme call hydrogenase that be able to evolve hydrogen from proton and electron , and be able to take hydrogen up — basically what be happen in a fuel cell , in the anode of a fuel cell and in a reversible fuel cell . in our fuel cell , we do it with platinum ; life do it with a very , very common iron . and a team have now just be able to mimic that hydrogen - juggling hydrogenase . that be very exciting for fuel cell — to be able to do that without platinum .     power of shape : here be a whale . we 've see that the fin of this whale have tubercle on they . and those little bump actually increase efficiency in , for instance , the edge of an airplane — increase efficiency by about 32 percent . which be an amazing fossil fuel saving , if we be to just put that on the edge of a wing . color without pigment : this peacock be create color with shape . light come through , it bounce back off the layer ; it be call thin - film interference . imagine be able to self - assemble product with the last few layer play with light to create color . imagine be able to create a shape on the outside of a surface , so that it be self - cleaning with just water . that be what a leaf do . see that up - close picture ? that be a ball of water , and those be dirt particle . and that be an up - close picture of a lotus leaf . there be a company make a product call lotusan , which mimic — when the building facade paint dry , it mimic the bump in a self - clean leaf , and rainwater clean the building .     water be go to be our big , grand challenge : quench thirst . here be two organism that pull water . the one on the left be the namibian beetle pull water out of fog . the one on the right be a pill bug — pull water out of air , do not drink fresh water . pull water out of monterey fog and out of the sweaty air in atlanta , before it get into a building , be key technology .     separation technology be go to be extremely important . what if we be to say , no more hard rock mining ? what if we be to separate out metal from waste stream , small amount of metal in water ? that be what microbe do ; they chelate metal out of water . there be a company here in san francisco call mr3 that be embed mimic of the microbe ' molecule on filter to mine waste stream . green chemistry be chemistry in water . we do chemistry in organic solvent . this be a picture of the spinneret come out of a spider and the silk be form from a spider . be not that beautiful ? green chemistry be replace our industrial chemistry with nature 's recipe book . it be not easy , because life use only a subset of the element in the periodic table . and we use all of they , even the toxic one . to figure out the elegant recipe that would take the small subset of the periodic table , and create miracle material like that cell , be the task of green chemistry .     time degradation : packaging that be good until you do not want it to be good anymore , and dissolve on cue . that be a mussel you can find in the water out here , and the thread hold it to a rock be time ; at exactly two year , they begin to dissolve .     healing : this be a good one . that little guy over there be a tardigrade . there be a problem with vaccine around the world not get to patient . and the reason be that the refrigeration somehow gets break ; what be call the " cold chain " gets break . a guy name bruce rosner look at the tardigrade — which dry out completely , and yet stay alive for month and month and month , and be able to regenerate itself . and he find a way to dry out vaccine — encase they in the same sort of sugar capsule as the tardigrade have within its cell — mean that vaccine no long need to be refrigerate . they can be put in a glove compartment , ok . learn from organism . this be a session about water — learn about organism that can do without water , in order to create a vaccine that last and last and last without refrigeration .     I be not go to get to 12 . but what I be go to do be tell you that the most important thing , besides all of these adaptation , be the fact that these organism have figure out a way to do the amazing thing they do while take care of the place that be go to take care of their offspring . when they be involve in foreplay , they be think about something very , very important — and that be have their genetic material remain , 10,000 generation from now . and that mean find a way to do what they do without destroy the place that 'll take care of their offspring . that be the big design challenge . luckily , there be million and million of genius willing to gift we with their good idea . good luck have a conversation with they .     thank you .     ( applause )     chris anderson : talk about foreplay , I — we need to get to 12 , but really quickly .     janine benyus : oh really ? can : yeah . just like , you know , like the 10 - second version of 10 , 11 and 12 . because we just — your slide be so gorgeous , and the idea be so big , I can not stand to let you go down without see 10 , 11 and 12 .     jb : ok , put this — ok , I 'll just hold this thing . ok , great . ok , so that be the healing one . sense and respond : feedback be a huge thing . this be a locust . there can be 80 million of they in a square kilometer , and yet they do not collide with one another . and yet we have 3.6 million car collision a year . ( laughter ) right . there be a person at newcastle who have figure out that it be a very large neuron . and she be actually figure out how to make a collision - avoidance circuitry base on this very large neuron in the locust .     this be a huge and important one , number 11 . and that be the grow fertility . that mean , you know , net fertility farming . we should be grow fertility . and , oh yes — we get food , too . because we have to grow the capacity of this planet to create more and more opportunity for life . and really , that be what other organism do as well . in ensemble , that be what whole ecosystem do : they create more and more opportunity for life . our farming have do the opposite . so , farming base on how a prairie build soil , ranch base on how a native ungulate herd actually increase the health of the range , even wastewater treatment base on how a marsh not only clean the water , but create incredibly sparkling productivity .     this be the simple design brief . I mean , it look simple because the system , over 3.8 billion year , have work this out . that is , those organism that have not be able to figure out how to enhance or sweeten their place , be not around to tell we about it . that be the twelfth one . life — and this be the secret trick ; this be the magic trick — life create condition conducive to life . it build soil ; it clean air ; it clean water ; it mix the cocktail of gas that you and I need to live . and it do that in the middle of have great foreplay and meet their need . so it be not mutually exclusive . we have to find a way to meet our need , while make of this place an eden .     can : janine , thank you so much . ( applause )  
   I be not quite sure whether I really want to see a snare drum at nine o'clock or so in the morning .     ( laughter )     but anyway , it be just great to see such a full theater , and really , I must thank herbie hancock and his colleague for such a great presentation .     ( applause )     one of the interesting thing , of course , be the combination of that raw hand on the instrument and technology , and what he say about listen to our young people .     of course , my job be all about listen . and my aim , really , be to teach the world to listen . that be my only real aim in life . and it sound quite simple , but actually , it be quite a big , big job . because you know , when you look at a piece of music , for example , if I just open my little motorbike bag — we have here , hopefully , a piece of music that be full of little black dot on the page . and , you know , we open it up ... and I read the music . so technically , I can actually read this . I will follow the instruction , the tempo marking , the dynamic . I will do exactly as I be tell . and so therefore , because time be short , if I just play you , literally , the first , maybe , two line or so — it be very straightforward ; there be nothing too difficult about the piece . but here , I be be tell that the piece of music be very quick . I be be tell where to play on the drum . I be be tell which part of the stick to use . and I be be tell the dynamic . and I be also be tell that the drum be without snare . snare on , snare off . so therefore , if I translate this piece of music , we have this idea .     ( drum sound )     ( drum sound end )     and so on . my career would probably last about five year .     ( laughter )     however , what I have to do as a musician be do everything that be not on the music ; everything that there be not time to learn from a teacher , or to talk about , even , from a teacher . but it be the thing you notice when you be not actually with your instrument that , in fact , become so interesting , and that you want to explore through this tiny , tiny surface of a drum . so there , we experience the translation . now we 'll experience the interpretation .     ( drum sound )     ( drum sound end )     ( applause )     now my career may last a little long .     ( laughter )     but in a way , you know , it be the same if I look at you and I see a nice , bright young lady with a pink top on . I see that you be clutch a teddy bear , etc . , etc . so I get a basic idea as to what you might be about , what you might like , what you might do as a profession , etc . , etc . however , that be just the initial idea I may have that we all get when we actually look and we try to interpret . but actually it be so unbelievably shallow . in the same way , I look at the music ; I get a basic idea ; I wonder what technically might be hard , or , you know , what I want to do . just the basic feeling .     however , that be simply not enough . and I think what herbie say : please listen , listen . we have to listen to ourselves , first of all . if I play , for example , hold the stick — where literally I do not let go of the stick —     ( drum sound )     you 'll experience quite a lot of shock come up through the arm . and you feel really quite — believe it or not — detach from the instrument and from the stick , even though I be actually hold the stick quite tightly .     ( drum sound )     by hold it tightly , I feel strangely more detach . if I just simply let go and allow my hand , my arm , to be more of a support system , suddenly —     ( drum sound )     I have more dynamic with less effort . much more —     ( drum sound )     and I just feel , at last , one with the stick and one with the drum . and I be do far , far less .     so in the same way that I need time with this instrument , I need time with people in order to interpret they . not just translate they , but interpret they . if , for example , I play just a few bar of a piece of music for which I think of myself as a technician — that be , someone who be basically a percussion player —     ( marimba sound )     ( marimba sound end )     and so on , if I think of myself as a musician —     ( marimba sound )     ( marimba sound end )     and so on . there be a little bit of a difference there that be worth just —     ( applause )     think about .     and I remember when I be 12 year old , and I start play timpani and percussion , and my teacher say , " well , how be we go to do this ? you know , music be about listen . " and I say , " yes , I agree with that , so what be the problem ? " and he say , " well , how be you go to hear this ? how be you go to hear that ? " and I say , " well , how do you hear it ? " he say , " well , I think I hear it through here . " and I say , " well , I think I do too , but I also hear it through my hand , through my arm , cheekbone , my scalp , my tummy , my chest , my leg and so on . "     and so we begin our lesson every single time tune drum , in particular , the kettle drum , or timpani to such a narrow pitch interval , so something like —     ( marimba sound )     that of a difference . then gradually :     ( marimba sound )     and gradually :     ( marimba sound )     and it be amazing that when you do open your body up , and open your hand up to allow the vibration to come through , that in fact the tiny , tiny difference —     ( marimba sound )     can be feel with just the tiny part of your finger , there .     and so what we would do be that I would put my hand on the wall of the music room , and together , we would " listen " to the sound of the instrument , and really try to connect with those sound far , far more broadly than simply depend on the ear . because of course , the ear be subject to all sort of thing . the room we happen to be in , the amplification , the quality of the instrument , the type of stick —     ( marimba sound )     ( marimba sound end )     etc . , etc . , they be all different .     ( marimba sound )     ( marimba sound end )     same amount of weight , but different sound color . and that be basically what we be ; we be just human being , but we all have our own little sound color , as it be , that make up these extraordinary personality and character and interest and thing .     and as I grow old , I then audition for the royal academy of music in london , and they say , " well , no , we will not accept you , because we have not a clue , you know , of the future of a so - call ' deaf musician . ' " and I just could not quite accept that . and so therefore , I say to they , " well , look , if you refuse — if you refuse I through those reason , as oppose to the ability to perform and to understand and love the art of create sound — then we have to think very , very hard about the people you do actually accept . " and as a result , once we get over a little hurdle , and have to audition twice , they accept I . and not only that , what have happen be that it change the whole role of the music institution throughout the united kingdom .     under no circumstance be they to refuse any application whatsoever on the basis of whether someone have no arm , no leg — they could still perhaps play a wind instrument if it be support on a stand . no circumstance at all be use to refuse any entry . and every single entry have to be listen to , experienced , and then , base on the musical ability , then that person could either enter or not . and so therefore , this in turn mean that there be an extremely interesting bunch of student who arrive in these various music institution , and I have to say , many of they now in the professional orchestra throughout the world . the interesting thing about this as well , though —     ( applause )     be quite simply that not only be people connect with sound — which be you all of we — we well know that music really be our daily medicine .     I say " music , " but actually I mean " sound . " because some of the extraordinary thing I 've experience as a musician — when you may have a 15 - year - old lad who have get the most incredible challenge , who may not be able to control his movement , who may be deaf , who may be blind , etc . , etc . — suddenly , if that young lad sit close to this instrument , and perhaps even lie underneath the marimba , and you play something that be so incredibly organ - like , almost — I do not really have the right stick , perhaps — but something like this — let I change —     ( soft marimba sound )     ( soft marimba sound end )     something that be so unbelievably simple — but he would be experience something that I would not be , because I be on top of the sound . I have the sound come this way . he would have the sound come through the resonator . if there be no resonator on here , we would have :     ( marimba sound )     so he would have a fullness of sound that those of you in the front few row would not experience , those of you in the back few row would not experience , either . every single one of we , depend on where we be sit , will experience this sound quite , quite differently . and of course , be the participator of the sound , and that be , start from the idea of what type of sound I want to produce , for example , this sound :     ( no sound )     can you hear anything ? exactly — because I be not even touch it .     ( laughter )     but yet , we get the sensation of something happen . in the same way that when I see a tree move , then I imagine that tree make a rustle sound . do you see what I mean ? whatever the eye see , then there be always sound happen . so there be always , always that huge — I mean , just this kaleidoscope of thing to draw from .     so all of my performance be base on entirely what I experience , and not by learn a piece of music , put on someone else 's interpretation of it , you all the cd possible of that particular piece of music , and so on and so forth , because that be not give I enough of something that be so raw and so basic , and something that I can fully experience the journey of . so it may be that , in certain hall , this dynamic may well work .     ( soft marimba sound )     ( soft marimba sound end )     it may be that in other hall , they be simply not go to experience that at all , and so therefore , my level of soft , gentle playing may have to be —     ( marimba sound )     ( marimba sound end )     do you see what I mean ? so , because of this explosion in access to sound , especially through the deaf community , this have not only affect how music institution , how school for the deaf treat sound , and not just as a means of therapy — although , of course , be a participator of music , that definitely be the case as well — but it be mean that acoustician have have to really think about the type of hall they put together . there be so few hall in this world that actually have very good acoustic , dare I say . but by that I mean , where you can absolutely do anything you imagine . the tiny , softest , softest sound to something that be so broad , so huge , so incredible . there be always something : it may sound good up there , may not be so good there ; it may be great there , but terrible up there ; maybe terrible over there , but not too bad there , etc . , etc .     so to find an actual hall be incredible — for which you can play exactly what you imagine , without it be cosmetically enhance . so therefore , acoustician be actually in conversation with people who be hear impaired , and who be participator of sound . and this be quite interesting . I can not give you any detail as far as what be actually happen with those hall , but it be just the fact that they be go to a group of people for whom so many year , we 've be say , " well , how on earth can they experience music ? they be deaf . " we go like that , and we imagine that be what deafness be about . or we go like that , and we imagine that be what blindness be about . if we see someone in a wheelchair , we assume they can not walk . it may be that they can walk three , four , five step . that , to they , mean they can walk . in a year 's time , it could be two extra step . in another year 's time , three extra step .     those be hugely important aspect to think about . so when we do listen to each other , it be unbelievably important for we to really test our listening skill , to really use our body as a resonate chamber , to stop the judgment . for I , as a musician who deal with 99 percent of new music , it be very easy for I to say , " oh yes , I like that piece . no , I do not like that piece , " and so on . and I just find that I have to give those piece of music real time . it may be that the chemistry be not quite right between myself and that particular piece of music , but that do not mean I have the right to say it be a bad piece of music . and you know , one of the great thing about be a musician be that it be so unbelievably fluid . so there be no rule , no right , no wrong , this way , that way .     if I ask you to clap — maybe I can do this . if I can just say , " please clap and create the sound of thunder . " I be assume we 've all experience thunder . now , I do not mean just the sound ; I mean really listen to that thunder within yourself . and please try to create that through your clapping . try , just — please try .     ( loud clapping sound )     ( clapping end )     snow .     ( laughter )     snow .     ( soft clapping sound )     have you ever hear snow ?     audience : no .     evelyn glennie : well , then , stop clap .     ( laughter )     try again . try again : snow .     ( no sound )     see , you be awake .     rain .     ( light clapping sound )     eg : ( laugh )     not bad . not bad . the interesting thing here , though , be that I ask a group of kid not so long ago exactly the same question . now — great imagination , thank you very much . however , not one of you get out of your seat to think , " right ! how can I clap ? ok , maybe :     ( clapping sound )     maybe I can use my jewelry to create extra sound . maybe I can use the other part of my body to create extra sound . " not a single one of you think about clap in a slightly different way other than sit in your seat there and use two hand . in the same way , when we listen to music , we assume that it be all be feed through here . this be how we experience music . of course , it be not .     we experience thunder , thunder , thunder . think , think , think . listen , listen , listen . now , what can we do with thunder ? I remember my teacher , when I first start , my very first lesson , I be all prepare with stick , ready to go . and instead of he say , " ok , evelyn , please , foot slightly apart , arm at a more or less 90 - degree angle , stick in a more or less v shape , keep this amount of space here , etc . please keep your back straight , etc . , etc . , etc . " — where I be just probably go to end up absolutely rigid , frozen , and I would not be able to strike the drum because I be think of so many other thing , he say , " evelyn , take this drum away for seven day , and I 'll see you next week . "     so — heaven ! what be I to do ? I no long require the stick . I be not allow to have these stick . I have to basically look at this particular drum , see how it be make , what these little lug do , what the snare do . turn it upside down , experiment with the shell .     ( drum sound )     experiment with the head .     ( drum sound )     experiment with my body .     ( drum sound )     experiment with jewelry . experiment with all sort of thing .     ( drum sound )     ( drum sound end )     and of course , I return with all sort of bruise .     ( laughter )     but nevertheless , it be such an unbelievable experience , because where on earth be you go to experience that in a piece of music ? where on earth be you go to experience that in a study book ? so we never , ever deal with actual study book . so for example , one of the thing that we learn when we be deal with be a percussion player as oppose to a musician , be basically , straightforward single - stroke roll .     ( drum sound )     like that , and then we get a little fast —     ( drum sound )     and a little fast —     ( drum sound )     and a little fast , and so on and so forth . what do this piece require ? single - stroke roll .     ( drum sound )     so why can not I then do that whilst learn a piece of music ? and that be exactly what he do . and interestingly , the old I become , and when I become a full - time student at a so - call " music institution , " all of that go out of the window . we have to study from study book . and constantly , the question , " well , why ? why ? what be this relate to ? I need to play a piece of music . " " well , this will help your control . " " well , how ? why do I need to learn that ? I need to relate it to a piece of music . you know , I need to say something .     why be I practice paradiddle ?     ( drum sound )     be it just literally for control , for hand - stick control ? why be I do that ? I need to have the reason , and the reason have to be by say something through the music . " and by say something through music , which basically be sound , we then can reach all sort of thing to all sort of people . but I do not want to take responsibility of your emotional baggage . that be up to you , when you walk through a hall , because that then determine what and how we listen to certain thing . I may feel sorrowful , or happy , or exhilarate , or angry when I play certain piece of music , but I be not necessarily want you to feel exactly the same thing . so please , the next time you go to a concert , just allow your body to open up , allow your body to be this resonate chamber . be aware that you be not go to experience the same thing as the performer be .     the performer be in the bad possible position for the actual sound , because they be hear the contact of the stick —     ( drum sound )     on the drum , or the mallet on the bit of wood , or the bow on the string , etc . , or the breath that be create the sound from wind and brass . they be experience that rawness there . but yet they be experience something so unbelievably pure , which be before the sound be actually happen . please take note of the life of the sound after the actual initial strike , or breath , be be pull . just experience the whole journey of that sound in the same way that I wish I would experience the whole journey of this particular conference , rather than just arrive last night . but I hope maybe we can share one or two thing as the day progress . but thank you very much for have I !     ( applause )     ( applause end )     ( music )     ( music end )     ( applause )  
   thank you very much . now , I 've get a story for you . when I arrive off the plane , after a very long journey from the west of england , my computer , my beloved laptop , have go mad , and have — oh ! — a bit like that ! — and the display on it — anyway , the whole thing have burst . and I go to the it guy here and a gentleman mend my computer , and then he say , " what be you do here ? " and I say " I be play the cello and I be do a bit of singing , " and he say , " oh , I sort of play the cello as well . " and I say , " do you really ? " anyway , so you be in for a treat , because he be fantastic , and his name 's mark .     ( applause )     I be also join by my partner in crime , thomas dolby .     ( applause )     this song be call " farth than the sun . "     ( music )     ♫ string in the wind I call you ♫     ♫ but you do not hear ... ♫     ♫ and you be a plant that need poor soil ♫     ♫ and I have treat you too well ♫     ♫ to give up flower ... ♫     ♫ oh , I have be too rich for you ... ♫     ♫ far than the sun from I ♫     ♫ far than I would have you be ♫     ♫ and I go north , I get so cold ♫     ♫ my heart be lava under stone ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ... ♫     ♫ with your calculate eye ♫     ♫ spinning figure ♫     ♫ you can not see I ♫     ♫ you can not see I ... ♫     ♫ and if I tell myself enough ♫     ♫ I 'll believe it ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ the sea , it freeze over ... ♫     ♫ to trap the light ♫     ♫ and I be in love with be in love ♫     ♫ and you be never quite the one ♫     ♫ in gerda 's eye ♫     ♫ fragment of what you 've become ♫     ♫ and all the moth that fly at night ♫     ♫ believe electric light be bright ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ with your calculate eye ♫     ♫ spinning figure ♫     ♫ you can not see I , no ♫     ♫ and if I tell myself enough ♫     ♫ I 'll believe it ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ far than the sun from I ♫     ♫ far than I would have you be ♫     ♫ and I go north , I get so cold ♫     ♫ my heart be lava under stone ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ you be not worthy ♫     ♫ with your calculate eye ♫     ♫ spinning figure ♫     ♫ you can not see I , no ... ♫     ♫ and if I tell myself enough , I 'll believe it ♫     ( applause )     thank you very much .  
   okay .     ♫ stroll along in central park ♫     ♫ everyone 's out today ♫     ♫ the daisy and dogwood be all in bloom ♫     ♫ oh , what a glorious day ♫     ♫ for picnic and frisbee and roller skater , ♫     ♫ friend and lover and lonely sunbather ♫     ♫ everyone be out in merry manhattan in january ♫     ( laughter ) ( applause )     ♫ I bring the iced tea ; ♫     ♫ do you bring the bug spray ? ♫     ♫ the fly be the size of your head ♫     ♫ next to the palm tree , ♫     ♫ do you see the ' gator ♫     ♫ look happy and well feed ? ♫     ♫ everyone be out in merry manhattan in january ♫     ( whistling )     everyone !     ( whistling ) ( laughter )     ♫ my preacher say , ♫     ♫ do not you worry ♫     ♫ the scientist have it all wrong ♫     ♫ and so , who care it be winter here ? ♫     ♫ and I have my halter - top on ♫     ♫ I have my halter - top on ♫     ♫ everyone be out in merry manhattan in january . ♫     ( applause )     chris anderson : jill sobule !  
   this song be one of thomas ' favorite , call " what you do with what you 've get . "     ♫ you must know someone like he ♫     ♫ he be tall and strong and lean ♫     ♫ with a body like a greyhound ♫     ♫ and a mind so sharp and keen ♫     ♫ but his heart , just like laurel ♫     ♫ grow twisted around itself ♫     ♫ till almost everything he do ♫     ♫ bring pain to someone else ♫     ♫ it be not just what you be bear with ♫     ♫ it be what you choose to bear ♫     ♫ it be not how big your share be ♫     ♫ it be how much you can share ♫     ♫ it be not the fight you dream of ♫     ♫ it be those you really fight ♫     ♫ it be not what you 've be give ♫     ♫ it be what you do with what you 've get ♫     ♫ what be the use of two strong leg ♫     ♫ if you only run away ? ♫     ♫ and what be the use of the fine voice ♫     ♫ if you 've nothing good to say ? ♫     ♫ what be the use of strength and muscle ♫     ♫ if you only push and shove ? ♫     ♫ and what be the use of two good ear ♫     ♫ if you can not hear those you love ? ♫     ♫ what be the use of two strong leg ♫     ♫ if you only run away ? ♫     ♫ and what be the use of the fine voice ♫     ♫ if you 've nothing good to say ? ♫     ♫ what be the use of strength and muscle ♫     ♫ if you only push and shove ? ♫     ♫ and what be the use of two good ear ♫     ♫ if you can not hear those you love ? ♫     ♫ between those who use their neighbor ♫     ♫ and those who use the cane ♫     ♫ between those in constant power ♫     ♫ and those in constant pain ♫     ♫ between those who run to glory ♫     ♫ and those who can not run ♫     ♫ tell I which one be the cripple ♫     ♫ and which one touch the sun ♫     ♫ which one touch the sun ♫     ♫ which one touch the sun ♫     ( applause ) thank you very much .  
   this be about a place in london call kiteflyer 's hill where I use to go and spend hour go " when be he come back ? when be he come back ? " so this be another one dedicated to that guy ... who I 've get over . but this be " kiteflyer 's hill . " it be a beautiful song write by a guy call martin evan , actually , for I .     boo hewerdine , thomas dolby , thank you very much for invite I . it be be a blessing singing for you . thank you very much .     ♫ do you remember when we use to go ♫     ♫ up to kiteflyer 's hill ? ♫     ♫ those summer night , so still ♫     ♫ with all of the city beneath we ♫     ♫ and all of our life ahead ♫     ♫ before cruel and foolish word ♫     ♫ be cruelly and foolishly say ♫     ♫ some night I think of you ♫     ♫ and then I go up ♫     ♫ on kiteflyer 's hill ♫     ♫ wrap up against the winter chill ♫     ♫ and somewhere in the city beneath I ♫     ♫ you lie asleep in your bed ♫     ♫ and I wonder if ever just briefly ♫     ♫ do I creep in your dream now and then ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ my wild summer love ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ have the year be kind ? ♫     ♫ and do you think of I sometimes ♫     ♫ up on kiteflyer 's hill ? ♫     ♫ oh , I pray you one day will ♫     ♫ we will not say a word ♫     ♫ we will not need they ♫     ♫ sometimes silence be good ♫     ♫ we 'll just stand in the still of the evening ♫     ♫ and whisper farewell to loneliness ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ my wild summer love ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ do you think of I sometimes ? ♫     ♫ and do you ever make that climb ? ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ my wild summer love ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ have the year be kind ? ♫     ♫ and do you ever make that climb ♫     ♫ up on kiteflyer 's hill ? kiteflyer 's ... ♫     ♫ [ french ] ♫     ♫ where be you ? where be you now ? ♫     ♫ where be you now ? ♫     ♫ kiteflyer 's ... ♫     ( applause )     gracia . thank you very much .  
   thomas dolby : for pure pleasure please welcome the lovely , the delectable , and the bilingual rachelle garniez .     ( applause )     ( bell )     ( trumpet )     rachelle garniez : ♫ quand il I prend dan se bras ♫     ♫ il I parle tout bas , ♫     ♫ je vois la vie en rise . ♫     ♫ il I dit des mots d'amour , ♫     ♫ des mots de tous les jour , ♫     ♫ et can I fait quelque choose . ♫     ♫ il e entre dan mon coeur ♫     ♫ une part de bonheur ♫     ♫ do not je connais la cause . ♫     ♫ c' lui pour moi . moi pour lui ♫     ♫ dan la vie , ♫     ♫ il I l'a dit , l'a jure [ pour ] la vie . ♫     ♫ et des que je l'apercois ♫     ♫ alor je sen en moi ♫     ♫ mon coeur qui bat ♫     ( applause )  
   ♫ like the heather ♫     ♫ on the hillside ♫     ♫ as they drive we ♫     ♫ from the highland ♫     ♫ like the ice flow ♫     ♫ from the arctic ♫     ♫ where we land ♫     ♫ in newfoundland ♫     ♫ there be a color ♫     ♫ to my sorrow ♫     ♫ there be a name for ♫     ♫ all this sadness ♫     ♫ like the ocean ♫     ♫ in between we ♫     ♫ I be blue ♫     ♫ blue be a river ♫     ♫ blue remember ♫     ♫ blue water ♫     ♫ run clear ♫     ♫ blue like a planet ♫     ♫ to a spaceman ♫     ♫ blue river ♫     ♫ of my tear ♫     ( fiddle and synthesizer )     ♫ so I come here ♫     ♫ to the city ♫     ♫ where the dream burn ♫     ♫ like a furnace ♫     ♫ and I dazzle ♫     ♫ in these dark street ♫     ♫ like a diamond ♫     ♫ in a coalface ♫     ♫ then the cold wind ♫     ♫ from the island ♫     ♫ blow a storm cloud ♫     ♫ across the new moon ♫     ♫ like the gun smoke ♫     ♫ above the house ♫     ♫ in my home ♫     ♫ blue be a river ♫     ♫ blue remember ♫     ♫ blue water ♫     ♫ run clear ♫     ♫ blue like a planet ♫     ♫ to a spaceman ♫     ♫ blue river ♫     ♫ of my tear ♫     ♫ blue river ♫     ♫ of my tear ♫     ( fiddle and synthesizer )     ( applause )  
   I would like to start tonight by something completely different , ask you to join I by step off the land and jump into the open ocean for a moment . 90 percent of the living space on the planet be in the open ocean , and it be where life — the title of our seminar tonight — it be where life begin . and it be a lively and a lovely place , but we be rapidly change the ocean with our — not only with our overfishing , our irresponsible fishing , our adding of pollutant like fertilizer from our cropland , but also , most recently , with climate change , and steve schneider , I be sure , will be go into great detail on this . now , as we continue to tinker with the ocean , more and more report be predict that the kind of sea that we be create will be conducive to low - energy type of animal , like jellyfish and bacteria . and this might be the kind of sea we be head for .     now jellyfish be strangely hypnotic and beautiful , and you 'll see lot of gorgeous one at the aquarium on friday , but they ste like hell , and jellyfish sushi and sashimi be just not go to fill you up . about 100 gram of jellyfish equal four calorie . so it may be good for the waistline , but it probably will not keep you satiate for very long . and a sea that be just fill and teem with jellyfish be not very good for all the other creature that live in the ocean , that be , unless you eat jellyfish . and this be this voracious predator launch a sneak attack on this poor little unsuspecting jellyfish there , a by - the - wind sailor . and that predator be the giant ocean sunfish , the mola mola , whose primary prey be jellyfish .     this animal be in " the guinness world book of record " for be the world 's heavy bony fish . it reach up to almost 5,000 pound — on a diet of jellyfish , primarily . and I think it be kind of a nice little cosmological convergence here that the mola mola — its common name be sunfish — that its favorite food be the moon jelly . so it be kind of nice , the sun and the moon get together this way , even if one be eat the other . now this be typically how you see sunfish , this be where they get their common name . they like to sunbathe , can not blame they . they just lie out on the surface of the sea and most people think they be sick or lazy , but that be a typical behavior , they lie out and bask on the surface .     their other name , mola mola , be — it sound hawaiian , but it be actually latin for millstone , and that be attributable to their roundish , very bizarre , cut - off shape . it be as if , as they be grow , they just forget the tail part . and that be actually what draw I to the mola in the first place , be this terribly bizarre shape . you know , you look at shark , and they be streamline , and they be sleek , and you look at tuna , and they be like torpedo — they just give away their agenda . they be about migration and strength , and then you look at the sunfish .     ( laughter )     and this be just so elegantly mysterious , it be just — it really kind of hold its card a lot tight than say , a tuna . so I be just intrigue with what — you know , what be this animal 's story ? well , as with anything in biology , nothing really make sense except in the light of evolution . the mola 's no exception . they appear shortly after the dinosaur disappear , 65 million year ago , at a time when whale still have leg , and they come from a rebellious little puffer fish faction — oblige I a little kipling - esque storytelling here . of course evolution be somewhat random , and you know , about 55 million year ago there be this rebellious little puffer fish faction that say , oh , the heck with the coral reef — we be go to head to the high sea . and lot of generation , lot of tweak and torquing , and we turn our puffer into the mola . you know , if you give mother nature enough time , that be what she will produce .     they look — maybe they look kind of prehistoric and unfinished , abridge perhaps , but in fact , in fact they be the — they vie for the top position of the most evolutionarily - derive fish in the sea , right up there with flat fish . they be — every single thing about that fish have be change . and in term of fish — fish appear 500 million year ago , and they be pretty modern , just 50 million year ago , so — so interestingly , they give away their ancestry as they develop . they start as little egg , and they be in " the guinness world book of record " again for have the most number of egg of any vertebrate on the planet . a single four - foot female have 300 million egg , can carry 300 million egg in her ovary — imagine — and they get to be over 10 foot long . imagine what a 10 foot one have . and from that little egg , they pass through this spiky little porcupine fish stage , reminiscent of their ancestry , and develop — this be their little adolescent stage . they school as adolescent , and become behemoth loner as adult . that be a little diver up there in the corner .     they be in " the guinness world book of record " again for be the vertebrate growth champion of the world . from their little hatching size of their egg , into their little larval stage till they reach adulthood , they put on 600 million time an increase in weight . 600 million . now imagine if you give birth to a little baby , and you have to feed this thing . that would mean that your child , you would expect it to gain the weight of six titanic . now I do not know how you would feed a child like that but — we do not know how fast the mola grow in the wild , but captive growth study at the monterey bay aquarium — one of the first place to have they in captivity — they have one that gain 800 lb in 14 month . I say , now , that be a true american .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     so be a loner be a great thing , especially in today 's sea , because schooling use to be salvation for fish , but it be suicide for fish now . but unfortunately mola , even though they do not school , they still get catch in net as by - catch . if we be go to save the world from total jellyfish domination , then we 've get to figure out what the jellyfish predator — how they live their life , like the mola . and unfortunately , they make up a large portion of the california by - catch — up to 26 percent of the drift net . and in the mediterranean , in the swordfish net fishery , they make up up to 90 percent . so we 've get to figure out how they be live their life . and how do you do that ? how do you do that with an animal — very few place in the world . this be an open ocean creature . it know no boundary — it do not go to land .     how do you get insight ? how do you seduce an open ocean creature like that to spill its secret ? well , there be some great new technology that have just recently become available , and it be just a boon for get insight into open ocean animal . and it be picture right here , that little tag up there . that little tag can record temperature , depth and light intensity , which be correlate with time , and from that we can get location . and it can record this datum for up to two year , and keep it in that tag , release at a pre - programmed time , float to the surface , upload all that datum , that whole travelogue , to satellite , which relay it directly to our computer , and we 've get that whole dataset . and we do not even have — we just have to tag the animal and then we go home and you know , sit at our desk . so the great thing about the mola be that when we put the tag on they — if you look up here — that be stream off , that be right where we put the tag . and it just so happen that be a parasite hang off the mola .     mola be infamous for carry ton of parasite . they be just parasite hotel ; even their parasite have parasite . I think donne write a poem about that . but they have 40 genera of parasite , and so we figure just one more parasite will not be too much of a problem . and they happen to be a very good vehicle for carry oceanographic equipment . they do not seem to mind , so far . so what be we try to find out ? we be focus on the pacific . we be tag on the california coast , and we be tag over in taiwan and japan . and we be interested in how these animal be use the current , use temperature , use the open ocean , to live their life . we would love to tag in monterey . monterey be one of the few place in the world where mola come in large number . not this time of year — it be more around october .     and we would love to tag here — this be an aerial shot of monterey — but unfortunately , the mola here end up look like this because another one of our local really like mola but in the wrong way . the california sea lion take the mola as soon as they come into the bay , rip off their fin , fashion they into the ultimate frisbee , mola style , and then toss they back and forth . and I be not exaggerate , it be just — and sometimes they do not eat they , it be just spiteful . and you know , the local think it be terrible behavior , it be just horrible watch this happen , day after day . the poor little mola come in , getting rip to shred , so we head down south , to san diego . not so many california sea lion down there . and the mola there , you can find they with a spotter plane very easily , and they like to hang out under float raft of kelp . and under those kelp — this be why the mola come there because it be spa time for the mola there . as soon as they get under those raft of kelp , the exfoliate clean fish come . and they come and give the mola — you can see they strike this funny little position that say , " I be not threaten , but I need a massage . "     ( laughter )     and they 'll put their fin out and their eye go in the back of their head , and the fish come up and they just clean , clean , clean — because the mola , you know , there be just a smorgasbord of parasite . and it be also a great place to go down south because the water 's warm , and the mola be kind of friendly down there . I mean what other kind of fish , if you approach it right , will say , " okay , scratch I right there . " you truly can swim up to a mola — they be very gentle — and if you approach they right , you can give they a scratch and they enjoy it . so we 've also tag one part of the pacific ; we 've go over to another part of the pacific , and we 've tag in taiwan , and we tag in japan . and over in these place , the mola be catch in set net that line these country . and they be not throw back as by - catch , they be eat . we be serve a nine - course meal of mola after we tag . well , not the one we tag ! and everything from the kidney , to the testis , to the back bone , to the fin muscle to — I think that ís pretty much the whole fish — be eat .     so the hard part of tagging , now , be after you put that tag on , you have to wait , month . and you be just wonder , oh , I hope the fish be safe , I hope , I hope it be go to be able to actually live its life out during the course that the tag be record . the tag cost 3500 dollar each , and then satellite time be another 500 dollar , so you be like , oh , I hope the tag be okay . and so the waiting be really the hard part . I be go to show you our late dataset . and it have not be publish , so it be totally privy information just for ted . and in show you this , you know , when we be look at this data , we be think , oh do these animal , do they cross the equator ? do they go from one side of the pacific to the other ? and we find that they kind of be homebody . they be not big migrator . this be their track : we deploy the tag off of tokyo , and the mola in one month kind of get into the kuroshio current off of japan and forage there . and after four month , go up , you know , off of the north part of japan . and that be kind of their home range . now that be important , though , because if there be a lot of fishing pressure , that population do not get replenish . so that be a very important piece of datum .     but also what be important be that they be not slacker , lazy fish . they be super industrious . and this be a day in the life of a mola , and if we — they be up and down , and up and down , and up and down , and up and up and down , up to 40 time a day . as the sun come up , you see in the blue , they start their dive . down — and as the sun get bright they go a little deep , little deep . they plumb the depth down to 600 meter , in temperature to one degree centigrade , and this be why you see they on the surface — it be so cold down there . they 've get to come up , warm , get that solar power , and then plunge back into the depth , and go up and down and up and down . and they be hit a layer down there ; it be call the deep scattering layer — which a whole variety of food 's in that layer . so rather than just be some sunbathe slacker , they be really very industrious fish that dance this wild dance between the surface and the bottom and through temperature .     we see the same pattern — now with these tag we be see a similar pattern for swordfish , manta ray , tuna , a real three - dimensional play . this be part of a much large program call the census of marine life , where they be go to be tag all over the world and the mola 's go to enter into that . and what be exciting — you all travel , and you know the good thing about travel be to be able to find the local , and to find the great place by get the local knowledge . well now with the census of marine life , we 'll be able to sidle up to all the local and explore 90 percent of our living space , with local knowledge . it be never — it be really never be a more exciting , or a vital time , to be a biologist .     which bring I to my last point , and what I think be kind of the most fun . I set up a website because I be get so many question about mola and sunfish . and so I just figure I would have the question answer , and I would be able to thank my funder , like national geographic and lindbergh . but people would write into the site with all sort of , all sort of story about these animal and want to help I get sample for genetic analysis . and what I find most exciting be that everyone have a share — a share love and an interest in the ocean . I be get report from catholic nun , jewish rabbis , muslims , christians — everybody write in , unite by their love of life . and to I that — I do not think I could say it any well than the immortal bard himself : " one touch of nature make the whole world kin . " and sure , it may be just one big old silly fish , but it be help . if it be help to unite the world , I think it be definitely the fish of the future .  
   thank you very much , chris . everybody who come up here say they be scared . I do not know if I be scared , but this be my first time of address an audience like this . and I do not have any smart technology for you to look at . there be no slide , so you 'll just have to be content with I . ( laughter )     what I want to do this morning be share with you a couple of story and talk about a different africa . already this morning there be some allusion to the africa that you hear about all the time : the africa of hiv / aids , the africa of malaria , the africa of poverty , the africa of conflict , and the africa of disaster .     while it be true that those thing be go on , there be an africa that you do not hear about very much . and sometimes I be puzzled , and I ask myself why . this be the africa that be change , that chris allude to . this be the africa of opportunity . this be the africa where people want to take charge of their own future and their own destiny . and this be the africa where people be look for partnership to do this . that be what I want to talk about today .     and I want to start by tell you a story about that change in africa . on 15th of september 2005 , mr . diepreye alamieyeseigha , a governor of one of the oil - rich state of nigeria , be arrest by the london metropolitan police on a visit to london . he be arrest because there be transfer of eight million dollar that go into some dormant account that belong to he and his family . this arrest occur because there be cooperation between the london metropolitan police and the economic and financial crime commission of nigeria — lead by one of our most able and courageous people : mr . nuhu ribadu . alamieyeseigha be arraign in london . due to some slip - up , he manage to escape dress as a woman and run from london back to nigeria where , accord to our constitution , those in office as governor , president — as in many country — have immunity and can not be prosecute . but what happen : people be so outraged by this behavior that it be possible for his state legislature to impeach he and get he out of office .     today , alam — as we call he for short — be in jail . this be a story about the fact that people in africa be no long willing to tolerate corruption from their leader . this be a story about the fact that people want their resource manage properly for their good , and not take out to place where they 'll benefit just a few of the elite . and therefore , when you hear about the corrupt africa — corruption all the time — I want you to know that the people and the government be try hard to fight this in some of the country , and that some success be emerge .     do it mean the problem be over ? the answer be no . there be still a long way to go , but that there be a will there . and that success be be chalk up on this very important fight . so when you hear about corruption , do not just feel that nothing be be do about this — that you can not operate in any african country because of the overwhelming corruption . that be not the case . there be a will to fight , and in many country , that fight be ongoing and be be win . in other , like mine , where there have be a long history of dictatorship in nigeria , the fight be ongoing and we have a long way to go .     but the truth of the matter be that this be go on . the result be show : independent monitoring by the world bank and other organization show that in many instance the trend be downward in term of corruption , and governance be improve . a study by the economic commission for africa show a clear trend upwards in governance in 28 african country .     and let I say just one more thing before I leave this area of governance . that be that people talk about corruption , corruption . all the time when they talk about it you immediately think about africa . that be the image : african country . but let I say this : if alam be able to export eight million dollar into an account in london — if the other people who have take money , estimate at 20 to 40 billion now of develop country ' monie sit abroad in the develop country — if they be able to do this , what be that ? be that not corruption ? in this country , if you receive steal good , be you not prosecute ? so when we talk about this kind of corruption , let we also think about what be happen on the other side of the globe — where the money be go and what can be do to stop it . I be work on an initiative now , along with the world bank , on asset recovery , try to do what we can to get the monie that have be take abroad — develop country ' money — to get that send back . because if we can get the 20 billion dollar sit out there back , it may be far more for some of these country than all the aid that be be put together . ( applause )     the second thing I want to talk about be the will for reform . african , after — they be tired , we be tired of be the subject of everybody 's charity and care . we be grateful , but we know that we can take charge of our own destiny if we have the will to reform . and what be happen in many african country now be a realization that no one can do it but we . we have to do it . we can invite partner who can support we , but we have to start . we have to reform our economy , change our leadership , become more democratic , be more open to change and to information .     and this be what we start to do in one of the large country on the continent , nigeria . in fact , if you be not in nigeria , you be not in africa . I want to tell you that . ( laughter ) one in four sub - saharan african be nigerian , and it have 140 million dynamic people — chaotic people — but very interesting people . you 'll never be bored . ( laughter )     what we start to do be to realize that we have to take charge and reform ourselves . and with the support of a leader who be willing , at the time , to do the reform , we put forward a comprehensive reform program , which we develop ourselves . not the international monetary fund . not the world bank , where I work for 21 year and rise to be a vice president . no one can do it for you . you have to do it for yourself .     we put together a program that would , one : get the state out of business it have nothing — it have no business be in . the state should not be in the business of produce good and service because it be inefficient and incompetent . so we decide to privatize many of our enterprise . ( applause ) we — as a result , we decide to liberalize many of our market . can you believe that prior to this reform — which start at the end of 2003 , when I leave washington to go and take up the post of finance minister — we have a telecommunications company that be only able to develop 4,500 landline in its entire 30 - year history ? ( laughter )     have a telephone in my country be a huge luxury . you could not get it . you have to bribe . you have to do everything to get your phone . when president obasanjo support and launch the liberalization of the telecommunications sector , we go from 4,500 landline to 32 million gsm line , and counting . nigeria 's telecom market be the second - fast grow in the world , after china . we be get investment of about a billion dollar a year in telecom . and nobody know , except a few smart people . ( laughter )     the smart one , first to come in , be the mtn company of south africa . and in the three year that I be finance minister , they make an average of 360 million dollar profit per year . 360 million in a market — in a country that be a poor country , with an average per capita income just under 500 dollar per capita . so the market be there . when they keep this under wrap , but soon other get to know . nigerian themselves begin to develop some wireless telecommunications company , and three or four other have come in . but there be a huge market out there , and people do not know about it , or they do not want to know . so privatization be one of the thing we 've do .     the other thing we 've also do be to manage our finance well . because nobody be go to help you and support you if you be not manage your own finance well . and nigeria , with the oil sector , have the reputation of be corrupt and not manage its own public finance well . so what do we try to do ? we introduce a fiscal rule that de - link our budget from the oil price . before we use to just budget on whatever oil we bring in , because oil be the big , most revenue - earn sector in the economy : 70 percent of our revenue come from oil . we de - link that , and once we do it , we begin to budget at a price slightly low than the oil price and save whatever be above that price . we do not know we could pull it off ; it be very controversial . but what it immediately do be that the volatility that have be present in term of our economic development — where , even if oil price be high , we would grow very fast . when they crash , we crash . and we could hardly even pay anything , any salary , in the economy . that smoothen out . we be able to save , just before I leave , 27 billion dollar . whereas — and this go to our reserve — when I arrive in 2003 , we have seven billion dollar in reserve . by the time I leave , we have go up to almost 30 billion dollar . and as we speak now , we have about 40 billion dollar in reserve due to proper management of our finance . and that shore up our economy , make it stable .     our exchange rate that use to fluctuate all the time be now fairly stable and be manage so that business people have a predictability of price in the economy . we bring inflation down from 28 percent to about 11 percent . and we have gdp grow from an average of 2.3 percent the previous decade to about 6.5 percent now . so all the change and reform we be able to make have show up in result that be measurable in the economy .     and what be more important , because we want to get away from oil and diversify — and there be so many opportunity in this one big country , as in many country in africa — what be remarkable be that much of this growth come not from the oil sector alone , but from non - oil . agriculture grow at well than eight percent . as telecom sector grow , housing and construction , and I could go on and on . and this be to illustrate to you that once you get the macro - economy straighten out , the opportunity in various other sector be enormous .     we have opportunity in agriculture , like I say . we have opportunity in solid mineral . we have a lot of mineral that no one have even invest in or explore . and we realize that without the proper legislation to make that possible , that would not happen . so we 've now get a mining code that be comparable with some of the good in the world . we have opportunity in housing and real estate . there be nothing in a country of 140 million people — no shopping mall as you know they here . this be an investment opportunity for someone that excite the imagination of people . and now , we have a situation in which the business in this mall be do four time the turnover that they have project .     so , huge thing in construction , real estate , mortgage market . financial service : we have 89 bank . too many not do their real business . we consolidate they from 89 to 25 bank by require that they increase their capital — share capital . and it go from about 25 million dollar to 150 million dollar . the bank — these bank be now consolidate , and that strengthening of the banking system have attract a lot of investment from outside . barclays bank of the u.k . be bring in 500 million . standard charter have bring in 140 million . and I can go on . dollar , on and on , into the system .     we be do the same with the insurance sector . so in financial service , a great deal of opportunity . in tourism , in many african country , a great opportunity . and that be what many people know east africa for : the wildlife , the elephant , and so on . but manage the tourism market in a way that can really benefit the people be very important .     so what be I try to say ? I be try to tell you that there be a new wave on the continent . a new wave of openness and democratization in which , since 2000 , more than two - third of african country have have multi - party democratic election . not all of they have be perfect , or will be , but the trend be very clear . I be try to tell you that since the past three year , the average rate of growth on the continent have move from about 2.5 percent to about five percent per annum . this be well than the performance of many oecd country . so it be clear that thing be change .     conflict be down on the continent ; from about 12 conflict a decade ago , we be down to three or four conflict — one of the most terrible , of course , of which be darfur . and , you know , you have the neighborhood effect where if something be go on in one part of the continent , it look like the entire continent be affect . but you should know that this continent be not — be a continent of many country , not one country . and if we be down to three or four conflict , it mean that there be plenty of opportunity to invest in stable , grow , exciting economy where there be plenty of opportunity . and I want to just make one point about this investment .     the good way to help african today be to help they to stand on their own foot . and the good way to do that be by help create job . there be no issue with fight malaria and put money in that and save child 's life . that be not what I be say . that be fine . but imagine the impact on a family : if the parent can be employ and make sure that their child go to school , that they can buy the drug to fight the disease themselves . if we can invest in place where you yourself make money whilst create job and help people stand on their own foot , be not that a wonderful opportunity ? be not that the way to go ? and I want to say that some of the good people to invest in on the continent be the woman . ( applause )     I have a cd here . I be sorry that I do not say anything on time . otherwise , I would have like you to have see this . it say , " africa : open for business . " and this be a video that have actually win an award as the good documentary of the year . understand that the woman who make it be go to be in tanzania , where they be have the session in june . but it show you african , and particularly african woman , who against all odd have develop business , some of they world - class .     one of the woman in this video , adenike ogunlesi , make child 's clothe — which she start as a hobby and grow into a business . mix african material , such as we have , with material from elsewhere . so , she 'll make a little pair of dungaree with corduroy , with african material mix in . very creative design , have reach a stage where she even have an order from wal - mart . ( laughter ) for 10,000 piece . so that show you that we have people who be capable of do .     and the woman be diligent . they be focused ; they work hard . I could go on give example : beatrice gakuba of rwanda , who open up a flower business and be now export to the dutch auction in amsterdam each morning and be employ 200 other woman and man to work with she . however , many of these be starve for capital to expand , because nobody believe outside of our country that we can do what be necessary . nobody think in term of a market . nobody think there be opportunity . but I be stand here say that those who miss the boat now , will miss it forever .     so if you want to be in africa , think about investing . think about the beatrice , think about the adenike of this world , who be do incredible thing , that be bring they into the global economy , whilst at the same time make sure that their fellow man and woman be employ , and that the child in those household get educate because their parent be earn adequate income .     so I invite you to explore the opportunity . when you go to tanzania , listen carefully , because I be sure you will hear of the various opening that there will be for you to get involve in something that will do good for the continent , for the people and for yourself .     thank you very much . ( applause )  
   so I want to talk to you today about aid in sub - saharan africa . and this be a pretty well - educate audience , so I imagine you all know something about aid . you probably know that roughly 25 million people in africa be infect with the virus , that aids be a disease of poverty , and that if we can bring africa out of poverty , we would decrease aid as well . if you know something more , you probably know that uganda , to date , be the only country in sub - saharan africa that have have success in combat the epidemic . use a campaign that encourage people to abstain , be faithful , and use condom — the abc campaign — they decrease their prevalence in the 1990 from about 15 percent to 6 percent over just a few year . if you follow policy , you probably know that a few year ago the president pledge 15 billion dollar to fight the epidemic over five year , and a lot of that money be go to go to program that try to replicate uganda and use behavior change to encourage people and decrease the epidemic .     so today I be go to talk about some thing that you might not know about the epidemic , and I be actually also go to challenge some of these thing that you think that you do know . to do that I be go to talk about my research as an economist on the epidemic . and I be not really go to talk much about the economy . I be not go to tell you about export and price . but I be go to use tool and idea that be familiar to economist to think about a problem that be more traditionally part of public health and epidemiology . and I think in that sense , this fit really nicely with this lateral thinking idea . here I be really use the tool of one academic discipline to think about problem of another .     so we think , first and foremost , aids be a policy issue . and probably for most people in this room , that be how you think about it . but this talk be go to be about understand fact about the epidemic . it be go to be about think about how it evolve , and how people respond to it . I think it may seem like I be ignore the policy stuff , which be really the most important , but I be hope that at the end of this talk you will conclude that we actually can not develop effective policy unless we really understand how the epidemic work .     and the first thing that I want to talk about , the first thing I think we need to understand be : how do people respond to the epidemic ? so aids be a sexually transmit infection , and it kill you . so this mean that in a place with a lot of aid , there be a really significant cost of sex . if you be an uninfected man live in botswana , where the hiv rate be 30 percent , if you have one more partner this year — a long - term partner , girlfriend , mistress — your chance of die in 10 year increase by three percentage point .     that be a huge effect . and so I think that we really feel like then people should have less sex . and in fact among gay man in the us we do see that kind of change in the 1980 . so if we look in this particularly high - risk sample , they be be ask , " do you have more than one unprotected sexual partner in the last two month ? " over a period from ' 84 to ' 88 , that share drop from about 85 percent to 55 percent . it be a huge change in a very short period of time .     we do not see anything like that in africa . so we do not have quite as good datum , but you can see here the share of single man have pre - marital sex , or married man have extra - marital sex , and how that change from the early ' 90 to late ' 90 , and late ' 90 to early 2000s . the epidemic be get bad . people be learn more thing about it . we see almost no change in sexual behavior . these be just tiny decrease — two percentage point — not significant .     this seem puzzling . but I be go to argue that you should not be surprise by this , and that to understand this you need to think about health the way than an economist do — as an investment . so if you be a software engineer and you be try to think about whether to add some new functionality to your program , it be important to think about how much it cost . it be also important to think about what the benefit be . and one part of that benefit be how much long you think this program be go to be active . if version 10 be come out next week , there be no point in add more functionality into version nine .     but your health decision be the same . every time you have a carrot instead of a cookie , every time you go to the gym instead of go to the movie , that be a costly investment in your health . but how much you want to invest be go to depend on how much long you expect to live in the future , even if you do not make those investment . aids be the same kind of thing . it be costly to avoid aid . people really like to have sex . but , you know , it have a benefit in term of future longevity . but life expectancy in africa , even without aids , be really , really low : 40 or 50 year in a lot of place . I think it be possible , if we think about that intuition , and think about that fact , that maybe that explain some of this low behavior change .     but we really need to test that . and a great way to test that be to look across area in africa and see : do people with more life expectancy change their sexual behavior more ? and the way that I be go to do that is , I be go to look across area with different level of malaria . so malaria be a disease that kill you . it be a disease that kill a lot of adult in africa , in addition to a lot of child . and so people who live in area with a lot of malaria be go to have low life expectancy than people who live in area with limited malaria . so one way to test to see whether we can explain some of this behavior change by difference in life expectancy be to look and see be there more behavior change in area where there be less malaria .     so that be what this figure show you . this show you — in area with low malaria , medium malaria , high malaria — what happen to the number of sexual partner as you increase hiv prevalence . if you look at the blue line , the area with low level of malaria , you can see in those area , actually , the number of sexual partner be decrease a lot as hiv prevalence go up . area with medium level of malaria it decrease some — it do not decrease as much . and area with high level of malaria — actually , it be increase a little bit , although that be not significant .     this be not just through malaria . young woman who live in area with high maternal mortality change their behavior less in response to hiv than young woman who live in area with low maternal mortality . there be another risk , and they respond less to this exist risk .     so by itself , I think this tell a lot about how people behave . it tell we something about why we see limited behavior change in africa .     but it also tell we something about policy . even if you only care about aids in africa , it might still be a good idea to invest in malaria , in combat poor indoor air quality , in improve maternal mortality rate . because if you improve those thing , then people be go to have an incentive to avoid aid on their own . but it also tell we something about one of these fact that we talk about before . education campaign , like the one that the president be focus on in his funding , may not be enough , at least not alone . if people have no incentive to avoid aid on their own , even if they know everything about the disease , they still may not change their behavior .     so the other thing that I think we learn here be that aid be not go to fix itself . people be not change their behavior enough to decrease the growth in the epidemic . so we be go to need to think about policy and what kind of policy might be effective .     and a great way to learn about policy be to look at what work in the past . the reason that we know that the abc campaign be effective in uganda be we have good datum on prevalence over time . in uganda we see the prevalence go down . we know they have this campaign . that be how we learn about what work . it be not the only place we have any intervention . other place have try thing , so why do not we look at those place and see what happen to their prevalence ?     unfortunately , there be almost no good datum on hiv prevalence in the general population in africa until about 2003 . so if I ask you , " why do not you go and find I the prevalence in burkina faso in 1991 ? " you get on google , you google , and you find , actually the only people test in burkina faso in 1991 be std patient and pregnant woman , which be not a terribly representative group of people . then if you poke a little more , you look a little more at what be go on , you would find that actually that be a pretty good year , because in some year the only people test be iv drug user . but even bad — some year it be only iv drug user , some year it be only pregnant woman . we have no way to figure out what happen over time . we have no consistent testing .     now in the last few year , we actually have do some good testing . in kenya , in zambia , and a bunch of country , there be be test in random sample of the population . but this leave we with a big gap in our knowledge . so I can tell you what the prevalence be in kenya in 2003 , but I can not tell you anything about 1993 or 1983 .     so this be a problem for policy . it be a problem for my research . and I start think about how else might we figure out what the prevalence of hiv be in africa in the past . and I think that the answer be , we can look at mortality datum , and we can use mortality datum to figure out what the prevalence be in the past .     to do this , we be go to have to rely on the fact that aids be a very specific kind of disease . it kill people in the prime of their life . not a lot of other disease have that profile . and you can see here — this be a graph of death rate by age in botswana and egypt . botswana be a place with a lot of aids , egypt be a place without a lot of aid . and you see they have pretty similar death rate among young kid and old people . that suggest it be pretty similar level of development .     but in this middle region , between 20 and 45 , the death rate in botswana be much , much , much high than in egypt . but since there be very few other disease that kill people , we can really attribute that mortality to hiv . but because people who die this year of aids get it a few year ago , we can use this datum on mortality to figure out what hiv prevalence be in the past . so it turn out , if you use this technique , actually your estimate of prevalence be very close to what we get from test random sample in the population , but they be very , very different than what unaid tell we the prevalence be .     so this be a graph of prevalence estimate by unaid , and prevalence base on the mortality datum for the year in the late 1990 in nine country in africa . you can see , almost without exception , the unaid estimate be much high than the mortality - base estimate . unaid tell we that the hiv rate in zambia be 20 percent , and mortality estimate suggest it be only about 5 percent . and these be not trivial difference in mortality rate . so this be another way to see this . you can see that for the prevalence to be as high as unaids say , we have to really see 60 death per 10,000 rather than 20 death per 10,000 in this age group .     I be go to talk a little bit in a minute about how we can use this kind of information to learn something that be go to help we think about the world . but this also tell we that one of these fact that I mention in the beginning may not be quite right . if you think that 25 million people be infect , if you think that the unaid number be much too high , maybe that be more like 10 or 15 million . it do not mean that aid be not a problem . it be a gigantic problem . but it do suggest that that number might be a little big . what I really want to do , be I want to use this new datum to try to figure out what make the hiv epidemic grow fast or slow .     and I say in the beginning , I be not go to tell you about export . when I start work on these project , I be not think at all about economic , but eventually it kind of suck you back in . so I be go to talk about export and price . and I want to talk about the relationship between economic activity , in particular export volume , and hiv infection .     so obviously , as an economist , I be deeply familiar with the fact that development , that openness to trade , be really good for develop country . it be good for improve people 's life . but openness and inter - connectedness , it come with a cost when we think about disease . I do not think this should be a surprise . on wednesday , I learn from laurie garrett that I be definitely go to get the bird flu , and I would not be at all worried about that if we never have any contact with asia .     and hiv be actually particularly closely link to transit . the epidemic be introduce to the us by actually one male steward on an airline flight , who get the disease in africa and bring it back . and that be the genesis of the entire epidemic in the us . in africa , epidemiologist have note for a long time that truck driver and migrant be more likely to be infect than other people . area with a lot of economic activity — with a lot of road , with a lot of urbanization — those area have high prevalence than other .     but that actually do not mean at all that if we give people more export , more trade , that that would increase prevalence . by use this new datum , use this information about prevalence over time , we can actually test that . and so it seem to be — fortunately , I think — it seem to be the case that these thing be positively relate . more export mean more aid . and that effect be really big . so the datum that I have suggest that if you double export volume , it will lead to a quadrupling of new hiv infection .     so this have important implication both for forecasting and for policy . from a forecasting perspective , if we know where trade be likely to change , for example , because of the african growth and opportunity act or other policy that encourage trade , we can actually think about which area be likely to be heavily infect with hiv . and we can go and we can try to have pre - emptive preventive measure there . likewise , as we be develop policy to try to encourage export , if we know there be this externality — this extra thing that be go to happen as we increase export — we can think about what the right kind of policy be .     but it also tell we something about one of these thing that we think that we know . even though it be the case that poverty be link to aids , in the sense that africa be poor and they have a lot of aid , it be not necessarily the case that improve poverty — at least in the short run , that improve export and improve development — it be not necessarily the case that that be go to lead to a decline in hiv prevalence .     so throughout this talk I 've mention a few time the special case of uganda , and the fact that it be the only country in sub - saharan africa with successful prevention . it be be widely herald . it be be replicate in kenya , and tanzania , and south africa and many other place . but now I want to actually also question that . because it be true that there be a decline in prevalence in uganda in the 1990s . it be true that they have an education campaign . but there be actually something else that happen in uganda in this period .     there be a big decline in coffee price . coffee be uganda 's major export . their export go down a lot in the early 1990 — and actually that decline line up really , really closely with this decline in new hiv infection . so you can see that both of these series — the black line be export value , the red line be new hiv infection — you can see they be both increase . start about 1987 they be both go down a lot . and then actually they track each other a little bit on the increase later in the decade .     so if you combine the intuition in this figure with some of the datum that I talk about before , it suggest that somewhere between 25 percent and 50 percent of the decline in prevalence in uganda actually would have happen even without any education campaign .     but that be enormously important for policy . we be spend so much money to try to replicate this campaign . and if it be only 50 percent as effective as we think that it be , then there be all sort of other thing maybe we should be spend our money on instead . try to change transmission rate by treat other sexually transmit disease . try to change they by engage in male circumcision . there be ton of other thing that we should think about do . and maybe this tell we that we should be think more about those thing .     I hope that in the last 16 minute I 've tell you something that you do not know about aid , and I hope that I 've get you question a little bit some of the thing that you do know . and I hope that I 've convince you maybe that it be important to understand thing about the epidemic in order to think about policy .     but more than anything , you know , I be an academic . and when I leave here , I be go to go back and sit in my tiny office , and my computer , and my datum . and the thing that be most exciting about that be every time I think about research , there be more question . there be more thing that I think that I want to do . and what be really , really great about be here be I be sure that the question that you guy have be very , very different than the question that I think up myself . and I can not wait to hear about what they be . so thank you very much .  
   allison hunt : my three minute have not start yet , have it ?     chris anderson : no , you can not start the three minute . reset the three minute , that be just not fair .     ah : oh my god , it be harsh up here . I mean I be nervous enough as it be .     but I be not as nervous as I be five week ago . five week ago I have total hip replacement surgery . do you know that surgery ? electric saw , power drill , totally disgusting unless you be david bolinsky , in which case it be all truth and beauty . sure david , if it be not your hip , it be truth and beauty .     anyway , I do have a really big epiphany around the situation , so chris invite I to tell you about it . but first you need to know two thing about I . just two thing . I be canadian , and I be the young of seven kid . now , in canada , we have that great healthcare system . that mean we get our new hip for free . and be the young of seven , I have never be at the front of the line for anything . ok ?     so my hip have be hurt I for year . I finally go to the doctor , which be free . and she refer I to an orthopedic surgeon , also free . finally get to see he after 10 month of wait — almost a year . that be what free get you . I meet the surgeon , and he take some free x - ray , and I get a good look at they . and you know , even I could tell my hip be bad , and I actually work in marketing . so he say , " allison , we 've get to get you on the table . I be go to replace your hip — it be about an 18 - month wait . " 18 more month . I would already wait 10 month , and I have to wait 18 more month .     you know , it be such a long wait that I actually start to even think about it in term of ted . I would not have my new hip for this ted . I would not have my new hip for tedglobal in africa . I would not have my new hip for ted2008 . I would still be on my bad hip . that be so disappointing .     so , I leave his office and I be walk through the hospital , and that be when I have my epiphany . this young of seven have to get herself to the front of the line . oh yeah .     can I tell you how un - canadian that be ? we do not think that way . we do not talk about it . it be not even a consideration . in fact , when we be travel abroad , it be how we identify fellow canadian . " after you . " " oh , no , no . after you . " hey , be you from canada ? " oh , I too ! hi ! " " great ! excellent ! "     so no , suddenly I be not averse to butt any geezer off the list . some 70 - year - old who want his new hip so he could be back golf , or gardening . no , no . front of the line .     so by now I be walk the lobby , and of course , that hurt , because of my hip , and I kind of need a sign . and I see a sign . in the window of the hospital 's tiny gift shop there be a sign that say , " volunteer need . " hmm . well , they sign I up immediately . no reference check . none of the usual background stuff , no . they be desperate for volunteer because the average age of the volunteer at the hospital gift shop be 75 . yeah . they need some young blood .     so , next thing you know , I have my bright blue volunteer vest , I have my photo I d , and I be fully train by my 89 - year - old boss . I work alone . every friday morning I be at the gift shop . while ring in hospital staff 's tic tac , I would casually ask , " what do you do ? " then I would tell they , " well , I be get my hip replace — in 18 month . it be going to be so great when the pain stop . ow ! " all the staff get to know the plucky , young volunteer .     my next surgeon 's appointment be , coincidentally , right after a shift at the gift shop . so , naturally , I have my vest and my identification . I drape they casually over the chair in the doctor 's office . and you know , when he walk in , I could just tell that he see they . moment later , I have a surgery date just week away , and a big fat prescription for percocet .     now , word on the street be that it be actually my volunteering that get I to the front of the line . and , you know , I be not even ashamed of that . two reason . first of all , I be go to take such good care of this new hip . but also I intend to stick with the volunteering , which actually lead I to the big epiphany of they all . even when a canadian cheat the system , they do it in a way that benefit society .  
   now , have any of you all ever look up this word ? you know , in a dictionary ? ( laughter ) yeah , that be what I think . how about this word ? here , I 'll show it to you . lexicography : the practice of compile dictionary . notice — we be very specific — that word " compile . " the dictionary be not carve out of a piece of granite , out of a lump of rock . it be make up of lot of little bit . it be little discrete — that be spell d - I - s - c - r - e - t - e — bit . and those bit be word .     now one of the perk of be a lexicographer — besides get to come to ted — be that you get to say really fun word , like lexicographical . lexicographical have this great pattern : it be call a double dactyl . and just by say double dactyl , I 've send the geek needle all the way into the red . ( laughter ) ( applause ) but " lexicographical " be the same pattern as " higgledy - piggledy . " right ? it be a fun word to say , and I get to say it a lot . now , one of the non - perk of be a lexicographer be that people do not usually have a kind of warm , fuzzy , snuggly image of the dictionary . right ? nobody hug their dictionary . but what people really often think about the dictionary be , they think more like this . just to let you know , I do not have a lexicographical whistle . but people think that my job be to let the good word make that difficult left - hand turn into the dictionary , and keep the bad word out .     but the thing be , I do not want to be a traffic cop . for one thing , I just do not do uniform . and for another , decide what word be good and what word be bad be actually not very easy . and it be not very fun . and when part of your job be not easy or fun , you kind of look for an excuse not to do they . so if I have to think of some kind of occupation as a metaphor for my work , I would much rather be a fisherman . I want to throw my big net into the deep , blue ocean of english and see what marvelous creature I can drag up from the bottom . but why do people want I to direct traffic , when I would much rather go fish ? well , I blame the queen . why do I blame the queen ? well , first of all , I blame the queen because it be funny . but secondly , I blame the queen because dictionary have really not change .     our idea of what a dictionary be have not change since her reign . the only thing that queen victoria would not be amuse by in modern dictionary be our inclusion of the f - word , which have happen in american dictionary since 1965 . so , there be this guy , right ? victorian era . james murray , first editor of the oxford english dictionary . I do not have that hat . I wish I have that hat . so he be really responsible for a lot of what we consider modern in dictionary today . when a guy who look like that , in that hat , be the face of modernity , you have a problem . and so , james murray could get a job on any dictionary today . there would be virtually no learning curve .     and of course , a few of we be say : okay , computer ! computer ! what about computer ? the thing about computer be , I love computer . I mean , I be a huge geek , I love computer . I would go on a hunger strike before I let they take away google book search from I . but computer do not do much else other than speed up the process of compile dictionary . they do not change the end result . because what a dictionary be , be it be victorian design merge with a little bit of modern propulsion . it be steampunk . what we have be an electric velocipede . you know , we have victorian design with an engine on it . that be all ! the design have not change .     and ok , what about online dictionary , right ? online dictionary must be different . this be the oxford english dictionary online , one of the good online dictionary . this be my favorite word , by the way . erinaceous : pertain to the hedgehog family ; of the nature of a hedgehog . very useful word . so , look at that . online dictionary right now be paper throw up on a screen . this be flat . look how many link there be in the actual entry : two ! right ? those little button , I have they all expand except for the date chart . so there be not very much go on here . there be not a lot of clickiness . and in fact , online dictionary replicate almost all the problem of print , except for searchability . and when you improve searchability , you actually take away the one advantage of print , which be serendipity . serendipity be when you find thing you be not look for , because find what you be look for be so damned difficult .     so — ( laughter ) ( applause ) — now , when you think about this , what we have here be a ham butt problem . do everyone know the ham butt problem ? woman 's make a ham for a big , family dinner . she go to cut the butt off the ham and throw it away , and she look at this piece of ham and she be like , " this be a perfectly good piece of ham . why be I throw this away ? " she think , " well , my mom always do this . " so she call up mom , and she say , " mom , why would you cut the butt off the ham , when you be make a ham ? " she say , " I do not know , my mom always do it ! " so they call grandma , and grandma say , " my pan be too small ! " ( laughter )     so , it be not that we have good word and bad word . we have a pan that be too small ! you know , that ham butt be delicious ! there be no reason to throw it away . the bad word — see , when people think about a place and they do not find a place on the map , they think , " this map suck ! " when they find a nightspot or a bar , and it be not in the guidebook , they be like , " ooh , this place must be cool ! it be not in the guidebook . " when they find a word that be not in the dictionary , they think , " this must be a bad word . " why ? it be more likely to be a bad dictionary . why be you blame the ham for be too big for the pan ? so , you can not get a small ham . the english language be as big as it be .     so , if you have a ham butt problem , and you be think about the ham butt problem , the conclusion that it lead you to be inexorable and counterintuitive : paper be the enemy of word . how can this be ? I mean , I love book . I really love book . some of my good friend be book . but the book be not the good shape for the dictionary . now they be go to think " oh , boy . people be go to take away my beautiful , paper dictionary ? " no . there will still be paper dictionary . when we have car — when car become the dominant mode of transportation , we do not round up all the horse and shoot they . you know , there be still go to be paper dictionary , but it be not go to be the dominant dictionary . the book - shape dictionary be not go to be the only shape dictionary come in . and it be not go to be the prototype for the shape dictionarie come in .     so , think about it this way : if you 've get an artificial constraint , artificial constraint lead to arbitrary distinction and a skewed worldview . what if biologist could only study animal that make people go , " aww . " right ? what if we make aesthetic judgment about animal , and only the one we think be cute be the one that we could study ? we would know a whole lot about charismatic megafauna , and not very much about much else . and I think this be a problem . I think we should you all the word , because when you think about word , you can make beautiful expression from very humble part . lexicography be really more about material science . we be study the tolerance of the material that you use to build the structure of your expression : your speech and your writing . and then , often people say to I , " well , ok , how do I know that this word be real ? " they think , " ok , if we think word be the tool that we use to build the expression of our thought , how can you say that screwdriver be well than hammer ? how can you say that a sledgehammer be well than a ball - peen hammer ? " they be just the right tool for the job .     and so people say to I , " how do I know if a word be real ? " you know , anybody who be read a child 's book know that love make thing real . if you love a word , use it . that make it real . be in the dictionary be an artificial distinction . it do not make a word any more real than any other way . if you love a word , it become real . so if we be not worry about direct traffic , if we 've transcend paper , if we be worry less about control and more about description , then we can think of the english language as be this beautiful mobile . and any time one of those little part of the mobile change , be touch , any time you touch a word , you use it in a new context , you give it a new connotation , you verb it , you make the mobile move . you do not break it . it be just in a new position , and that new position can be just as beautiful .     now , if you be no long a traffic cop — the problem with be a traffic cop be there can only be so many traffic cop in any one intersection , or the car get confused . right ? but if your goal be no long to direct the traffic , but maybe to count the car that go by , then more eyeball be well . you can ask for help ! if you ask for help , you get more do . and we really need help . library of congress : 17 million book , of which half be in english . if only one out of every 10 of those book have a word that be not in the dictionary in it , that would be equivalent to more than two unabridged dictionary .     and I find an un - dictionarie word — a word like " un - dictionarie , " for example — in almost every book I read . what about newspaper ? newspaper archive go back to 1759 , 58.1 million newspaper page . if only one in 100 of those page have an un - dictionarie word on it , it would be an entire other oed . that be 500,000 more word . so that be a lot . and I be not even talk about magazine . I be not talk about blog — and I find more new word on boingboe in a give week than I do newsweek or time . there be a lot go on there .     and I be not even talk about polysemy , which be the greedy habit some word have of take more than one meaning for themselves . so if you think of the word " set , " a set can be a badger 's burrow , a set can be one of the pleat in an elizabethan ruff , and there be one numbered definition in the oed . the oed have 33 different numbered definition for set . tiny , little word , 33 numbered definition . one of they be just label " miscellaneous technical sense . " do you know what that say to I ? that say to I , it be friday afternoon and somebody want to go down the pub . ( laughter ) that be a lexicographical cop out , to say , " miscellaneous technical sense . "     so , we have all these word , and we really need help ! and the thing be , we could ask for help — ask for help be not that hard . I mean , lexicography be not rocket science . see , I just give you a lot of word and a lot of number , and this be more of a visual explanation . if we think of the dictionary as be the map of the english language , these bright spot be what we know about , and the dark spot be where we be in the dark . if that be the map of all the word in american english , we do not know very much . and we do not even know the shape of the language . if this be the dictionary — if this be the map of american english — look , we have a kind of lumpy idea of florida , but there be no california ! we be miss california from american english . we just do not know enough , and we do not even know that we be miss california . we do not even see that there be a gap on the map .     so again , lexicography be not rocket science . but even if it be , rocket science be be do by dedicated amateur these day . you know ? it can not be that hard to find some word ! so , enough scientist in other discipline be really ask people to help , and they be do a good job of it . for instance , there be ebird , where amateur birdwatcher can upload information about their bird sighting . and then , ornithologist can go and help track population , migration , etc .     and there be this guy , mike oate . mike oate live in the u.k . he be a director of an electroplate company . he be find more than 140 comet . he be find so many comet , they name a comet after he . it be kind of out past mar . it be a hike . I do not think he be get his picture take there anytime soon . but he find 140 comet without a telescope . he download datum from the nasa soho satellite , and that be how he find they . if we can find comet without a telescope , should not we be able to find word ?     now , you all know where I be go with this . because I be go to the internet , which be where everybody go . and the internet be great for collect word , because the internet 's full of collector . and this be a little - know technological fact about the internet , but the internet be actually make up of word and enthusiasm . and word and enthusiasm actually happen to be the recipe for lexicography . be not that great ? so there be a lot of really good word - collect site out there right now , but the problem with some of they be that they be not scientific enough . they show the word , but they do not show any context . where do it come from ? who say it ? what newspaper be it in ? what book ?     because a word be like an archaeological artifact . if you do not know the provenance or the source of the artifact , it be not science , it be a pretty thing to look at . so a word without its source be like a cut flower . you know , it be pretty to look at for a while , but then it die . it die too fast . so , this whole time I 've be say , " the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary . " not " a dictionary , " or " dictionary . " and that be because , well , people use the dictionary to stand for the whole language . they use it synecdochically . and one of the problem of know a word like " synecdochically " be that you really want an excuse to say " synecdochically . " this whole talk have just be an excuse to get I to the point where I could say " synecdochically " to all of you . so I be really sorry . but when you use a part of something — like the dictionary be a part of the language , or a flag stand for the united states , it be a symbol of the country — then you be use it synecdochically . but the thing be , we could make the dictionary the whole language . if we get a big pan , then we can put all the word in . we can put in all the meaning . do not everyone want more meaning in their life ? and we can make the dictionary not just be a symbol of the language — we can make it be the whole language .     you see , what I be really hope for be that my son , who turn seven this month — I want he to barely remember that this be the form factor that dictionarie use to come in . this be what dictionary use to look like . I want he to think of this kind of dictionary as an eight - track tape . it be a format that die because it be not useful enough . it be not really what people need . and the thing be , if we can put in all the word , no long have that artificial distinction between good and bad , we can really describe the language like scientist . we can leave the aesthetic judgment to the writer and the speaker . if we can do that , then I can spend all my time fishing , and I do not have to be a traffic cop anymore . thank you very much for your kind attention .  
   three year ago , I get a phone call , base on an early film I have make , with an offer to embed the new hampshire national guard . my idea — and literally , I wake up in the middle of the night , and we 've all have those moment . you know , you go to sleep — I be excited , with this phone call . I be think , I just finish make another film about world war ii vet , and I realize I would get to know their story , and I realize this be a once - in - a - lifetime opportunity to tell a warrior 's story as it unfold . so I go to bed that night pretty excited . not sure of all the detail , but excited . it be not at four in the morning , but it be close to midnight . wake straight up . wide - awake as could be . and I have this idea : what if I could , in effect , virtually embe , and create a permeable relationship with the soldier ? to tell the story from the inside out , versus the outside in ?     so , I call back major heilshorn , who be the public affair officer of the new hampshire national guard . and he know I , so I be like , " greg ? " he be like , " yes , deborah ? " tell he my idea , and you know , he be one of the brave man in the world , as be general blair , who , in the end , give I permission to try this experiment .     within 10 day , I be down at fort dix . he give I my pick of unit . I pick one unit — charlie company , third of the 172nd , they be mountain infantry — for two reason . one , they be infantry . number two , they be go to be base at lsa anaconda , so I know they would have internet access . the caveat for my access be I have to get the soldier to volunteer . this be a big thing that I think when major h tell I , I be not really totally gather what that would mean .     so what that mean be , when I go down to fort dix , I have to hop out in front of 180 guy and tell they of my vision . you can imagine the hailstorm of question I get . the opening one be , " what the fuck do you know about the national guard ? " I start with the 1607 massachusetts bay colony pequot indian war . give they about a nine minute response , and there we go .     so , I would like to show the clip of the film . it be our trailer , because I know , obviously you guy be busy , many of you may not have have a chance to see it . so , I want to show the trailer , and then I be go to take apart one scene in detail . if we could roll ?     ( video ) stephen pink : this be sergeant stephen pink .     michael moriarty : specialist michael moriarty .     zack bazzi : do I really want to go ? probably not .     soldier : we be not suppose to talk to the medium .     sp : I be not the medium , dammit !     mm : the day be here . life will change .     voice : the real deal , man ! narrator : you ready ? soldier : bring it on ! narrator : you ready ? voice 2 : iraq , here we come !     zb : every soldier eventually want to go in combat . it be natural instinct .     sp : if you let fear get to you , then you be not go to be do your job .     mm : every single time you go out there , there be attack . it be unbelievable .     zb : hey , nestor , your ass crack be right in my face .     soldier : iv ! be we on fire ? iv ! man down ! man down !     mm : keep go , brother . you wanna play ?     michael moriarty 's wife : it be really hard for he to not have his dad .     mm : this little kid be in the middle of a war zone .     stephen pink 's girlfriend : in the beginning , he be like , " write something dirty ! "     george w. bush : the world 's new democracy .     mm : they be shoot at I .     sp : you do not put 150,000 troop in there , and say we be there to create democracy .     soldier : we 've get a drive through window at burger king now .     sp : we be here to create money .     mm : I support george bush . we be not there for the oil .     jon baril : the bad thing in my life .     sp : baril , do not look at it , bud .     michael moriarty 's wife : he be not the same person anymore .     mm : I will not go back .     kevin shangraw : the iraqi people be who we be there to help — and we just kill one .     soldier : sergeant smith be down ! sergeant smith be down ? there they be ! right there ! fire , fire !     jb : it 'll be a well country in 20 year , 'cause we be there . I hope .     ( applause ) deborah scranton : thank you . one of the thing I would like to talk to you about be have a conversation about something that be difficult to talk about . and I would like to relate an experience I have here at ted . I do not know how many of you might imagine it , but there be actually a tedster who recently get back from iraq . paul ? come on , stand up . this be paul anthony . he serve — ( applause ) — with the marine , and I want to tell you a little , brief story . we be one of the lucky one to get in the class with the sony camera and the vista software . right ? and we start talk . people will see my tag , and they 'll see " the war tape , " and then we 'll start talk about war .     we get in a conversation with some other people in the class , and it go on and on . I mean , we be there for an hour , talk . and it really highlight something that I would like to ask you guy to think about and hopefully to help with , which be , I think a lot of we be very afraid to have conversation about war , and about politic . and really — because maybe we be go to disagree . maybe it be go to get uncomfortable . how do we open it up to really be able to have a conversation ? and you know , paul be talk , and he then turn to constance and say , " you know , I would not have this conversation if she be not here , because I know she have my back . "     and I want to say , I be nervous . because I be use to do q&as . I really relate to what james be say yesterday , because I be behind the camera . you know , I can answer question about my movie , but for I to come up and talk for 18 minute be a really long time . so , I want to say , paul , I be happy you be here , because I know you have my back .     this film be not about the internet , but it could not have be make without it . the guy ' tape on average take two week to get from iraq to I . in the meantime , the soldier — we would email and I m. I do not save all of they , because I do not realize at the beginning that it would be something that I would want to keep track of . but there be 3,211 email and im and text message that I be able to save . the reason I quantify that be because we really embark on this as a mutual journey to really get inside of it . so I want to show you a clip , and then I be go tell you a little bit of how it got put together . if we could roll the clip .     ( video ) sp : today be sport . [ unclear ] radio : [ unclear ] christian soldier . sp : we like to give these insurgent a fair chance . so , what we do , we ride with the window down . because , you know , we obviously have the advantage . I be just kid . we do not fuck ride with the goddam window down . it be not true . very unsafe . whoa .     soldier : right there .     sp : all right , let us get over to that site . be advise , we be leave taji right now . we believe that the blast be right outside the gate of taji , we be head to that location now .     soldier : that be a fucking car bomb !     soldier : motherfucker !     soldier : get your vest on ! hey , get over the fucking — yeah , yeah . any one - four element get to the gate !     sp : sheriff one - six , or any one - four element , we need you at the gate of taji right now , over .     soldier : I 'll walk you through it . ( voice )     sp : stay low . head over to the right . get your bag , get your bag ! ( scream )     sp : it be mass casualty . probably 20 dead , at least 20 or 30 wounded iraqis .     sp : it just look like , you know , someone have throw a quarter through a guy , and it be just like — there be no blood come from the shrapnel wound . everything be cauterize , and it be just like there be a void go through the body . this be the scene north . they just remove a burn body , or half a body from here . I do not think there be anything leave from his abdominal down . this be blood . and you know , you walk , and you hear the piece of skin . and that be it , that be all that be leave . I remember give three ivs , bandage several wound . soldier sit in the corner of a sandbag wall , shake and scream . medic who be terrify and could not perform . I later hear that iraqi casualty be not to be treat in taji . they can work on the post for penny , but can not die there . they 've get to die outside . if one of those incompetent medical officer tell I to stop treatment , I would 've slit his throat right there . 21:00 hour , and it be just our squad go through today 's event in our head , whether we want to or not .     news anchor : more violence in iraq . twin suicide car bombing kill eight iraqi and wound dozen more near a coalition base north of baghdad .     sp : we make the news . I feel exploited and proud at the same time . I 've lose all faith in the medium — a hapless joke I would much rather laugh at than become a part of . I should really thank god for save my lucky ass . I 'll do that , then I be going to jerk off . because these page smell like lind , and there will not be any time for jerk off tomorrow . another mission at 06:00 .     ds : now — ( applause ) — thank . when I say early , to try and tell a story from the inside out , versus the outside in — part of what chris say so eloquently in his introduction — be this melding . it be a new way of try to make a documentary . when I meet the guy , and 10 of they agree to take camera — in total , 21 end up film . five soldier film the entire time . there be three feature in the film .     the way I learn about taji be steve pink send I an email , and in it , attach a photo of that burn body out at the car . and the tone from the email be , you know , it have be a very bad day , obviously . and I see in my I m window that mike moriarty be at the base . so , I ping mike and I say , " mike , can you please go get that interview with pink ? " because the thing that very often be miss be , in the military what they call " hot wash . " it be that immediate interview after something immediately happen , you know . and if you let time go by , it kind of soften and smooth the edge . and for I , I really want that .     so , in order to get the intimacy , to share that experience with you , the guy — the two most popular mount — there be a camera on the turret , the gun turret , and then on the dashboard of the humvee . most of the humvee , we end up mount two camera in they . so you get to experience that in real time , right ? the interview that you see be the one that mike go and do within 24 hour of that episode happen .     steve pink read his journal happen five month after he come home . I know about that journal , but it be very , very private . and you know , you earn someone 's trust , especially in doc filmmaking , through your relationship . so , it be not until five month after he be home that he would read that journal .     now , the news footage I put in there to try to show — you know , I think mainstream medium try to do the good they can in the format that they have . but the thing that I know you all have hear a lot of time , american soldier say , " why do not they talk about the good stuff that we do ? " ok , this be a perfect example . pink 's squad and another squad spend their entire day outside the wire . they do not have to go outside the wire . there be not americans hurt out there . they spend their entire day outside the wire try to save iraqi life — the iraqis who work on the post . so , when you may hear soldier complain , that be what they be talk about , you know ? and I think it be such an amazing gift that they would share this as a way of bridging .     and when I talk about that polarity I get at so many different q&as , and people be really opinionated . but it seem like people do not want to hear so much , or listen , or try to have an exchange . and I be as fiery as the next person , but I really think — you know , different speaker have talk about their concern for the world , and my concern be that we have to have these conversation . and we have to be able to go into scary place where we may , you know , we think we know . but we just have to leave that little bit of openness , to know . there be such a disconnect . and for I , it be try to bridge that disconnect . I 'll share one story . I get — I be often ask , you know , for I , what have be some of the special moment from having work on this film . and at screening , inevitably — you know , as I be sure all of you obviously do speak stuff — usually you have people who hang around and want to ask you more question . and usually , the first question be , " oh , what kind of camera do you use ? " or you know , these thing .     but there be always a few guy , almost always , who be the last one . and I 've learn over time that those be always the soldier . and they wait until pretty much everybody be go . and for I , one of the most profound story someone share with I , that then become my story , be — for those of you who have not see the film , and it be not a spoiler — it be very common there be a lot of civilian accident , where people get in front of humvee and they get kill . in this film , there be a scene where an iraqi woman be kill . a soldier come up to I and stand , you know really , pretty close , a foot away from I . he be a big guy . and he look at I , and I smile , and then I see the tear start well up in his eye . and he be not go to blink . and he say , " my gunner be throw candy . " and I know what he be go to say . the gunner be throw candy . they use to throw candy to the kid . kid get too close , very often . and he say , " I kill a child . and I be a father . I have child . I have not be able to tell my wife . I be afraid she be go to think I be a monster . " I hug he , of course , and I say , you know , " it be go to be ok . " and he say , " I be go to bring she to see your film . and then I be go to tell she . "     so when I talk about a disconnect , it be not only for maybe those people who do not know a soldier , which there obviously be . you know , these day , it be not like world war ii , where there be a war front and a home front , and everybody seem involved . you can go for day here and not feel like there be a war go on . and often , I 'll hear people say , who maybe know that I do this film , and they say , " oh , you know , I be against the war , but I support the soldier . " and I 've start to ask they , " well , that be nice . what be you do ? be you volunteer at a va ? you go and see anybody ? do you , if you find out your neighbor 's be , do you spend some time ? not necessarily ask question , but see if they want to talk ? do you give money to any of the charity ? " you know , obviously , like dean kamen 's work on that amazing thing , but there be charity where you can sponsor computer for wounded soldier .     I think , I challenge we to say — to operationalize those term , when we say we support someone , you know ? be you a friend to they ? do you really care ? and I would just say it be my hope , and I would ask you guy to please , you know , reach out a hand . and really do give they a hug . thank you .  
   in the next 18 minute , I be go to take you on a journey . and it be a journey that you and I have be on for many year now , and it begin some 50 year ago , when human first step off our planet . and in those 50 year , not only do we literally , physically set foot on the moon , but we have dispatch robotic spacecraft to all the planet — all eight of they — and we have land on asteroid , we have rendezvous with comet , and , at this point in time , we have a spacecraft on its way to pluto , the body formerly know as a planet . and all of these robotic mission be part of a big human journey : a voyage to understand something , to get a sense of our cosmic place , to understand something of our origin , and how earth , our planet , and we , live on it , come to be .     and of all the place in the solar system that we might go to and search for answer to question like this , there be saturn . and we have be to saturn before — we visit saturn in the early 1980 — but our investigation of saturn have become far more in - depth in detail since the cassini spacecraft , travel across interplanetary space for seven year , glide into orbit around saturn in the summer of 2004 , and become at that point the farth robotic outpost that humanity have ever establish around the sun .     now , the saturn system be a rich planetary system . it offer mystery , scientific insight and obviously splendor beyond compare , and the investigation of this system have enormous cosmic reach . in fact , just study the ring alone , we stand to learn a lot about the disc of star and gas that we call the spiral galaxy . and here be a beautiful picture of the andromeda nebula , which be our close , large spiral galaxy to the milky way . and then , here be a beautiful composite of the whirlpool galaxy , take by the hubble space telescope .     so the journey back to saturn be really part of and be also a metaphor for a much large human voyage to understand the interconnectedness of everything around we , and also how human fit into that picture . and it pain I that I can not tell you all that we have learn with cassini . I can not show you all the beautiful picture that we 've take in the last two and a half year , because I simply do not have the time . so I be go to concentrate on two of the most exciting story that have emerge out of this major exploratory expedition that we be conduct around saturn , and have be for the past two and a half year .     saturn be accompany by a very large and diverse collection of moon . they range in size from a few kilometer across to as big across as the u.s . most of the beautiful picture we 've take of saturn , in fact , show saturn in accompaniment with some of its moon . here be saturn with dione , and then , here be saturn show the ring edge - on , show you just how vertically thin they be , with the moon enceladus . now , two of the 47 moon that saturn have be standout .     and those be titan and enceladus . titan be saturn 's large moon , and , until cassini have arrive there , be the large single expanse of unexplored terrain that we have remain in our solar system . and it be a body that have long intrigue people who 've watch the planet . it have a very large , thick atmosphere , and in fact , its surface environment be believe to be more like the environment we have here on the earth , or at least have in the past , than any other body in the solar system . its atmosphere be largely molecular nitrogen , like you be breathe here in this room , except that its atmosphere be suffuse with simple organic material like methane and propane and ethane . and these molecule high up in the atmosphere of titan get break down , and their product join together to make haze particle . this haze be ubiquitous . it be completely global and envelop titan . and that be why you can not see down to the surface with our eye in the visible region of the spectrum .     but these haze particle , it be surmise , before we get there with cassini , over billion and billion of year , gently drift down to the surface and coat the surface in a thick organic sludge . so like the equivalent , the titan equivalent , of tar , or oil , or what — we do not know what . but this be what we suspect . and these molecule , especially methane and ethane , can be liquid at the surface temperature of titan . and so it turn out that methane be to titan what water be to the earth . it be a condensable in the atmosphere , and so recognize this circumstance bring to the fore a whole world of bizarre possibility . you can have methane cloud , ok , and above those cloud , you have this hundred of kilometer of haze , which prevent any sunlight from get to the surface . the temperature at the surface be some 350 degree below zero fahrenheit .     but despite that cold , you could have rain fall down on the surface of titan . and do on titan what rain do on the earth : it carve gullies ; it form river and cataract ; it can create canyon ; it can pool in large basin and crater . it can wash the sludge off high mountain peak and hill , down into the lowland . so stop and think for a minute . try to imagine what the surface of titan might look like . it be dark . high noon on titan be as dark as deep earth twilight on the earth . it be cold , it be eerie , it be misty , it might be rain , and you might be stand on the shore of lake michigan brim with paint thin . ( laughter )     that be the view that we have of the surface of titan before we get there with cassini ,    and I can tell you that what we have find on titan , though it be not the same in detail , be every bit as fascinating as that story be . and for we , it have be like — the cassini people — it have be like a jule verne adventure come true . as I say , it have a thick , extensive atmosphere . this be a picture of titan , backlit by the sun , with the ring as a beautiful backdrop . and yet another moon there — I do not even know which one it be . it be a very extensive atmosphere . we have instrument on cassini which can see down to the surface through this atmosphere , and my camera system be one of they . and we have take picture like this . and what you see be bright and dark region , and that be about as far as it get for we . it be so mystify : we could not make out what we be see on titan . when you look close at this region , you start to see thing like sinuous channel — we do not know . you see a few round thing . this , we later find out , be , in fact , a crater , but there be very few crater on the surface of titan , mean it be a very young surface . and there be feature that look tectonic . they look like they 've be pull apart . whenever you see anything linear on a planet , it mean there be be a fracture , like a fault . and so it be be tectonically alter .     but we could not make sense of our image , until , six month after we get into orbit , an event occur that many have regard as the highlight of cassini 's investigation of titan . and that be the deployment of the huygens probe , the european - build huygens probe that cassini have carry for seven year across the solar system . we deploy it to the atmosphere of titan , it take two and a half hour to descend , and it land on the surface . and I just want to emphasize how significant an event this be . this be a device of human making , and it land in the outer solar system for the first time in human history . it be so significant that , in my mind , this be an event that should have be celebrate with ticker tape parade in every city across the u.s . and europe , and sadly , that be not the case . ( laughter ) .     it be significant for another reason . this be an international mission , and this event be celebrate in europe , in germany , and the celebratory presentation be give in english accent , and american accent , and german accent , and french and italian and dutch accent . it be a move demonstration of what the word " united nations " be suppose to mean : a true union of nation join together in a colossal effort for good . and , in this case , it be a massive undertaking to explore a planet , and to come to understand a planetary system that , for all of human history , have be unreachable , and now human have actually touch it . so it be — I mean , I be get goose bump just talk about it . it be a tremendously emotional event , and it be something that I will personally never forget , and you should not either . ( applause ) .     but anyway , the probe take measurement of the atmosphere on the way down , and it also take panoramic picture . and I can not tell you what it be like to see the first picture of titan 's surface from the probe . and this be what we see . and it be a shocker , because it be everything we want those other picture take from orbit to be . it be an unambiguous pattern , a geological pattern . it be a dendritic drainage pattern that can be form only by the flow of liquid . and you can follow these channel and you can see how you all converge . and they converge into this channel here , which drain into this region . you be look at a shoreline . be this a shoreline of fluid ? we do not know . but this be somewhat of a shoreline .     this picture be take at 16 kilometer . this be the picture take at eight kilometer , ok ? again , the shoreline . okay , now , 16 kilometer , eight kilometer — this be roughly an airline altitude . if you be go to take an airplane trip across the u.s . , you would be fly at these altitude . so , this be the picture you would have at the window of titanian airline as you fly across the surface of titan . ( laughter )     and then finally , the probe come to rest on the surface , and I be go to show you , lady and gentleman , the first picture ever take from the surface of a moon in the outer solar system . and here be the horizon , ok ? these be probably water ice pebble , yes ? ( applause ) . and obviously , it land in one of these flat , dark region and it do not sink out of sight . so it be not fluid that we land in . what the probe come down in be basically the titan equivalent of a mud flat . this be an unconsolidated ground that be suffuse with liquid methane . and it be probably the case that this material have wash off the highland of titan through these channel that we see , and have drain over billion of year to fill in low - lie basin . and that be what the huygens probe land in .     but still , there be no sign in our image , or even in the huygen ' image , of any large , open body of fluid . where be they ? it get even more puzzling when we find dune . ok , so this be our movie of the equatorial region of titan , show these dune . these be dune that be 100 meter tall , separate by a few kilometer , and they go on for mile and mile and mile . there be hundred , up to a 1,000 or 1,200 mile of dune . this be the saharan desert of titan . it be obviously a place which be very dry , or you would not get dune .     so again , it got puzzle that there be no body of fluid , until finally , we see lake in the polar region . and there be a lake scene in the south polar region of titan . it be about the size of lake ontario . and then , only a week and a half ago , we fly over the north pole of titan and find , again , we find a feature here the size of the caspian sea . so it seem that the liquid , for some reason we do not understand , or during at least this season , be apparently at the pole of titan . and I think you would agree that we have find titan be a remarkable , mystical place . it be exotic , it be alien , but yet strangely earth - like , and have earth - like geological formation and a tremendous geographical diversity , and be a fascinating world whose only rival in the solar system for complexity and richness be the earth itself .     and so now we go onto enceladus . enceladus be a small moon , it be about a tenth the size of titan . and you can see it here next to england , just to show you the size . this be not mean to be a threat . ( laughter ) . and enceladus be very white , it be very bright , and its surface be obviously wreck with fracture . it be a very geologically active body . but the mother lode of discovery on enceladus be find at the south pole — and we be look at the south pole here — where we find this system of fracture . and they be a different color because they be a different composition . they be coat . these fracture be coat with organic material . moreover , this whole , entire region , the south polar region , have elevate temperature . it be the hot place on the planet , on the body . that be as bizarre as find that the antarctic on the earth be hot than the tropic .     and then , when we take additional picture , we discover that from these fracture be issue jet of fine , icy particle extend hundred of mile into space . and when we color - code this image , to bring out the faint light level , we see that these jet feed a plume that , in fact , we see , in other image , go thousand of mile into the space above enceladus . my team and I have examine image like this , and like this one , and have think about the other result from cassini . and we have arrive at the conclusion that these jet may be erupt from pocket of liquid water under the surface of enceladus .     so we have , possibly , liquid water , organic material and excess heat . in other word , we have possibly stumble upon the holy grail of modern day planetary exploration , or in other word , an environment that be potentially suitable for live organism . and I do not think I need to tell you that the discovery of life elsewhere in our solar system , whether it be on enceladus or elsewhere , would have enormous cultural and scientific implication . because if we could demonstrate that genesis have occur not once , but twice , independently , in our solar system , then that mean , by inference , it have occur a staggering number of time throughout the universe and its 13.7 billion year history .     right now , earth be the only planet still that we know be teem with life . it be precious , it be unique , it be still , so far , the only home we 've ever know . and if any of you be alert and coherent during the 1960 — and we would forgive you , if you be not , ok — you would remember this very famous picture take by the apollo 8 astronaut in 1968 . it be the first time that earth be image from space , and it have an enormous impact on our sense of place in the universe , and our sense of responsibility for the protection of our own planet .     well , we on cassini have take an equivalent first , a picture that no human eye have ever see before . it be a total eclipse of the sun , see from the other side of saturn . and in this impossibly beautiful picture , you see the main ring backlit by the sun , you see the refracted image of the sun and you see this ring create , in fact , by the exhalation of enceladus . but as if that be not brilliant enough , we can spot , in this beautiful image , sight of our own planet , cradle in the arm of saturn 's ring .     now , there be something deeply move about see ourselves from afar , and capture the sight of our little , blue - ocean planet in the sky of other world . and that , and the perspective of ourselves that we gain from that , may be , in the end , the fine reward that we earn from this journey of discovery that start half a century ago . and thank you very much . ( applause )  
   what I be always think about be what this session be about , which be call simplicity . and almost , I would almost call it be simple - minded , but in the good sense of the word . I be try to figure out two very simple thing : how to live and how to die , period . that be all I be try to do , all day long . and I be also try to have some meal , and have some snack , and , you know , and yell at my child , and do all the normal thing that keep you ground .     so , I be fortunate enough to be bear a very dreamy child . my old sister be busy torture my parent , and they be busy torture she . I be lucky enough to be completely ignore , which be a fabulous thing , actually , I want to tell you . so , I be able to completely daydream my way through my life . and I finally daydream my way into nyu , at a very good time , in 1967 , where I meet a man who be try to blow up the math building of nyu . and I be write terrible poetry and knit sweater for he . and feminist hate we , and the whole thing be wretche from begin to end . but I keep write bad poetry , and he do not blow up the math building , but he go to cuba . but I give he the money , because I be from riverdale so I have more money than he do . ( laughter ) and that be a good thing to help , you know , the cause . but , then he come back , and thing happen , and I decide I really hate my writing , that it be awful , awful , purple prose . and I decide that I want to tell — but I still want to tell a narrative story and I still want to tell my story . so I decide that I would start to draw . how hard could that be ? and so what happen be that I start just become an editorial illustrator through , you know , sheer whatever , sheer ignorance .     and we start a studio . well , tibor really start the studio , call m&co . and the premise of m&co be , we do not know anything , but that be all right , we be go to do it anyway . and as a matter of fact , it be well not to know anything , because if you know too much , you be stymie . so , the premise in the studio be , there be no boundary , there be no fear . and I — and my full - time job , I land the good job on earth , be to daydream , and to actually come up with absurd idea that — fortunately , there be enough people there , and it be a team , it be a collective , it be not just I come up with crazy idea . but the point be that I be there as myself , as a dreamer . and so some of the thing — I mean , it be a long history of m&co , and clearly we also need to make some money , so we decide we would create a series of product . and some of the watch there , attempt to be beautiful and humorous — maybe not attempt , hopefully succeed . that to be able to talk about content , to break apart what you normally expect , to use humor and surprise , elegance and humanity in your work be really important to we . it be a very high , it be a very impersonal time in design and we want to say , the content be what be important , not the package , not the wrapping . you really have to be journalist , you have to be inventor , you have to use your imagination more importantly than anything .     so , the good news be that I have a dog and , though I do not know if I believe in luck — I do not know what I believe in , it be a very complicated question , but I do know that before I go away , I crank his tail seven time . so , whenever he see a suitcase in the house , because everybody be always , you know , leave , they be always crank this wonderful dog 's tail , and he run to the other room . but I be able to make the transition from work for child and — from work for adult to child , and back and forth , because , you know , I can say that I be immature , and in a way , that be true . I do not really — I mean , I could tell you that I do not understand , I be not proud of it , but I do not understand let us say 95 percent of the talk at this conference . but I have be take beautiful note of drawing and I have a gorgeous onion from murray gell - mann 's talk . and I have a beautiful page of doodle from jonathan woodham 's talk . so , good thing come out of , you know , incomprehension — ( laughter ) — which I will do a painting of , and then it will end up in my work . so , I be open to the possibility of not know and find out something new .     so , in write for child , it seem simple , and it be . you have to condense a story into 32 page , usually . and what you have to do be , you really have to edit down to what you want to say . and hopefully , you be not talk down to kid and you be not talk in such a way that you , you know , could not stand read it after one time . so , I hopefully be write , you know , book that be good for child and for adult . but the painting reflect — I do not think differently for child than I do for adult . I try to use the same kind of imagination , the same kind of whimsy , the same kind of love of language . so , you know , and I have lot of wonderful - look friend .     this be andrew gatz , and he walk in through the door and I say , " you ! sit down there . " you know , I take lot of photo . and the bertoia chair in the background be my favorite chair . so , I get to put in all of the thing that I love . hopefully , a dialog between adult and child will happen on many different level , and hopefully different kind of humor will evolve . and the book be really journal of my life . I never — I do not like plot . I do not know what a plot mean . I can not stand the idea of anything that start in the beginning , you know , beginning , middle and end . it really scare I , because my life be too random and too confused , and I enjoy it that way .     but anyway , so we be in venice , and this be our room . and I have this dream that I be wear this fantastic green gown , and I be look out the window , and it be really a beautiful thing . and so , I be able to put that into this story , which be an alphabet , and hopefully go on to something else . the letter c have other thing in it . I be fortunate also , to meet the man who be sit on the bed , though I give he hair over here and he do not have hair . well , he have some hair but — well , he use to have hair . and with he , I be able to do a project that be really fantastic . I work for the new yorker , and I do cover , and 9/11 happen and it be , you know , a complete and utter end of the world as we know it .     and rick and I be on our way to a party in the bronx , and somebody say bronxistan , and somebody say ferreristan , and we come up with this new yorker cover , which we be able to — we do not know what we be do . we be not try to be funny , we be not try to be — well , we be try to be funny actually , that be not true . we hope we would be funny , but we do not know it would be a cover , and we do not know that that image , at the moment that it happen , would be something that would be so wonderful for a lot of people . and it really become the — I do not know , you know , it be one of those moment people start laugh at what be go on . and from , you know , fattushis , to taxistan to , you know , for the fashtoonk , botoxia , pashmina , khlintunisia , you know , we be able to take the city and make fun of this completely foreign , who be — what be go on over here ? who be these people ? what be these tribe ? and david remnick , who be really wonderful about it , have one problem . he do not like al zheimer , because he think it would insult people with alzheimer 's . but you know , we say , " david , who be go to know ? they be not . " ( laughter ) so it stay in , and it be , and , you know , it be a good thing . you know , in the course of my life , I never know what be go to happen and that be kind of the beauty part .     and we be on cape cod , a place , obviously , of great inspiration , and I pick up this book , " the element of style , " at a yard sale . and I do not — and I would never use it in school , because I be too busy writing poem , and flunk out , and I do not know what , sit in cafe . but I pick it up and I start read it and I think , this book be amazing . I say , people should know about this book . ( laughter ) so I decide it need a few — it need a lift , it need a few illustration . and basically , I call the , you know , I convince the white estate , and what an intersection of like , you know , polish jew , you know , main wasp family . here I be , say , I would like to do something to this book . and they say yes , and they leave I completely alone , which be a gorgeous , wonderful thing . and I take the example that they give , and just do 56 painting , basically . so , this be , I do not know if you can read this . " well , susan , this be a fine mess you be in . " and when you be deal with grammar , which be , you know , incredibly dry , e.b . white write such wonderful , whimsical — and actually , strunk — and then you come to the rule and , you know , there be lot of grammar thing . " do you mind I ask a question ? do you mind my ask a question ? " " would , could , should , or would , should , could . " and " would " be coco chanel 's lover , " should " be edith sitwell , and " could " be an august sander subject . and , " he notice a large stain in the center of the rug . " ( laughter )     so , there be a kind of british understatement , murder - mystery theme that I really love very much . and then , " be obscure clearly ! be wild of tongue in a way we can understand . " e.b . white write we a number of rule , which can either paralyze you and make you loathe he for the rest of time , or you can ignore they , which I do , or you can , I do not know what , you know , eat a sandwich . so , what I do when I be paint be I start singe , because I really adore singing , and I think that music be the high form of all art . so , I commission a wonderful composer , nico muhly , who write nine song use the text , and we perform this fantastic evening of — he write music for both amateur and professional . I play the clatter teacup and the slinky in the main reading room of the new york public library , where you be suppose to be very , very quiet , and it be a phenomenally wonderful event , which we hopefully will do some more .     who know ? the new york timesselect , the op - ed page , ask I to do a column , and they say , you can do whatever you want . so , once a month for the last year , I 've be do a column call " the principle of uncertainty , " which , you know , I do not know who heisenberg be , but I know I can throw that around now . you know , it be the principle of uncertainty , so , you know . I be go to read quickly — and probably I be go to edit some , because I do not have that much time leave — a few of the column . and basically , I be so , you know , it be so amusing , because I say , " well , how much space do I have ? " and they say , " well , you know , it be the internet . " and I say , " yes , but how much space do I have ? " and they say , " it be unlimited , it be unlimited . " ok . so , the first one I be very timid , and I 'll begin . " how can I tell you everything that be in my heart ? impossible to begin . enough . no . begin with the hapless dodo . " and I talk about the dodo , and how the dodo become extinct , and then I talk about spinoza . " as the last dodo be die , spinoza be look for a rational explanation for everything , call eudaemonia . and then he breathe his last , with love one around he , and I know that he have chicken soup also , as his last meal . " I happen to know it for a fact . and then he die , and there be no more spinoza . extinct .     and then , we do not have a stuffed spinoza , but we do have a stuffed pavlov 's dog , and I visit he in the museum of hygiene in st . petersburg , in russia . and there he be , with this horrible electrical box on his rump in this fantastic , decrepit palace . " and I think it must have be a very , very dark day when the bolshevik arrive . maybe amongst themselves they have a few good laugh , but stalin be a paranoid man , even more than my father . " ( laughter ) you do not even know . " and decide his top people have to be extinctifie . " which I think I make up , which be a good thing . and so , this be a chart of , you know , just a small chart , because the chart would go on forever of all the people that he kill . so , shoot dead , smack over the head , you know , throw away . " nabokov 's family flee russia . how could the young nabokov , sit innocently and elegantly in a red chair , leaf through a book and butterfly , imagine such displacement , such loss ? " and then I want to tell you that this be a map .     so , " my beautiful mother 's family flee russia as well . too many pogrom . leave the shack , the wild blueberry wood , the geese , the river sluch , they go to palestine and then america . " and my mother draw this map for I of the united states of america , and that be my dna over here , because that person who I grow up with have no use for fact whatsoever . fact be actually banish from our home . and so , if you see that texas — you know , texas and california be under canada , and that south carolina be on top of north carolina , this be the home that I grow up in , ok ? so , it be a miracle that I be here today . but actually , it be not . it be actually a wonderful thing . but then she say tel aviv and lenin , which be the town they come from , and , " sorry , the rest unknown , thank you . " but in her lexicon , " sorry , the rest unknown , thank you " be " sorry , the rest unknown , go to hell , " because she could not care less . ( laughter )     " the impossibility of february " be that february 's a really wretched month in new york and the image for I conjure up these really awful thing . well , not so awful . I receive a box in the mail and it be wrap with newspaper and there be the picture of the man on the newspaper and he be dead . and I say , " I hope he be not really dead , just enjoy a refreshing lie - down in the snow , but the caption say he be dead . " and actually , he be . I think he be dead , though I do not know , maybe he be not dead . " and this woman lean over in anguish , not about that man , but about all sad thing . it happen quite often in february . " there be consoling . this man be angry because somebody throw onion all over the staircase , and basically — you know , I guess onion be a theme here . and he say , " it be impossible not to lie . it be february and not lie be impossible . " and I really spend a lot of time wonder , how much truth do we tell ? what be it that we be actually — what story be we actually tell ? how do we know when we be ourselves ? how do we actually know that these sentence come out of our mouth be real story , you know , be real sentence ? or be they fake sentence that we think we ought to be say ?     I be go to quickly go through this . a quote by bertrand russell , " all the labor of all the age , all the devotion , all the inspiration , all the noonday brightness of human genius be destine to extinction . so now , my friend , if that be true , and it be true , what be the point ? " a complicated question . and so , you know , I talk to my friend and I go to play where they be singe russian song . oh my god , you know what ? could we have — no , we do not have time . I tape my aunt . I tape my aunt singe a song in russian from the — you know , could we have it for a second ? do you have that ? ( music ) ok . I tape my — my aunt use to swim in the ocean every day of the year until she be about 85 . so — and that be a song about how everybody be miserable because , you know , we be from russia . ( laughter )     I go to visit kitty carlisle hart , and she be 96 , and when I bring she a copy of " the element of style , " she say she would treasure it . and then I say — oh , and she be talk about moss hart , and I say , " when you meet he , you know it be he . " and she say , " I know it be he . " ( laughter ) so , I be the one who should have keep the book , but it be a really wonderful moment . and she date george gershwin , so , you know , get out . gershwin die at the age of 38 . he be bury in the same cemetery as my husband . I do not want to talk about that now . I do want to talk — the absolute icing on this cemetery cake be the barricini family mausoleum nearby . I think the barricini family should open a store there and sell chocolate . ( laughter ) and I would like to run it for they . and I go to visit louise bourgeoise , who be also still work , and I look at her sink , which be really amazing , and leave . and then I photograph and do a painting of a sofa on the street . and a woman who live on our street , lolita . and then I go and have some tea . and then my aunt france die , and before she die , she try to pay with sweet'n low packet for her bagel . ( laughter ) and I wonder what the point be and then I know , and I see that hy meyerowitz , rick meyerowitz 's father , a dry - clean supply salesman from the bronx , win the charlie chaplin look - alike contest in 1931 . that be actually hy . and I look at a beautiful bowl of fruit , and I look at a dress that I sew for friend of mine . and it say , " ich habe genug , " which be a bach cantata , which I once think mean " I 've have it , I can not take it anymore , give I a break , " but I be wrong . it mean " I have enough . " and that be utterly true . I happen to be alive , end of discussion . thank you . ( applause )  
   so I think , " I will talk about death . " seem to be the passion today . actually , it be not about death . it be inevitable , terrible , but really what I want to talk about be , I be just fascinate by the legacy people leave when they die . that be what I want to talk about .     so art buchwald leave his legacy of humor with a video that appear soon after he die , say , " hi ! I be art buchwald , and I just die . " and mike , who I meet at galapagos , a trip which I win at ted , be leave note on cyberspace where he be chronicle his journey through cancer . and my father leave I a legacy of his handwriting through letter and a notebook . in the last two year of his life , when he be sick , he fill a notebook with his thought about I . he write about my strength , weakness , and gentle suggestion for improvement , quote specific incident , and hold a mirror to my life .     after he die , I realize that no one write to I anymore . handwriting be a disappear art . I be all for email and think while type , but why give up old habit for new ? why can not we have letter writing and email exchange in our life ? there be time when I want to trade all those year that I be too busy to sit with my dad and chat with he , and trade all those year for one hug . but too late . but that be when I take out his letter and I read they , and the paper that touch his hand be in mine , and I feel connected to he .     so maybe we all need to leave our child with a value legacy , and not a financial one . a value for thing with a personal touch — an autographed book , a soul - search letter . if a fraction of this powerful ted audience could be inspire to buy a beautiful paper — john , it 'll be a recycle one — and write a beautiful letter to someone they love , we actually may start a revolution where our child may go to penmanship class .     so what do I plan to leave for my son ? I collect autographed book , and those of you author in the audience know I hound you for they — and cd too , tracy . I plan to publish my own notebook . as I witness my father 's body be swallow by fire , I sit by his funeral pyre and write . I have no idea how I be go to do it , but I be commit to compile his thought and mine into a book , and leave that publish book for my son .     I would like to end with a few verse of what I write at my father 's cremation . and those linguist , please pardon the grammar , because I 've not look at it in the last 10 year . I take it out for the first time to come here . " picture in a frame , ashe in a bottle , boundless energy confine in the bottle , force I to deal with reality , force I to deal with be grow up . I hear you and I know that you would want I to be strong , but right now , I be be suck down , surround and suffocate by these rage emotional water , crave to cleanse my soul , try to emerge on a firm foot one more time , to keep on fighting and flourish just as you teach I . your encouraging whisper in my whirlpool of despair , hold I and heave I to shore of sanity , to live again and to love again . " thank you .  
   thank you so much . it be really scary to be here among the smart of the smart . I be here to tell you a few tale of passion . there be a jewish saying that I love . what be true than truth ? answer : the story . I be a storyteller . I want to convey something that be true than truth about our common humanity . all story interest I , and some haunt I until I end up write they . certain theme keep come up : justice , loyalty , violence , death , political and social issue , freedom . I be aware of the mystery around we , so I write about coincidence , premonition , emotion , dream , the power of nature , magic .     in the last 20 year I have publish a few book , but I have live in anonymity until february of 2006 , when I carry the olympic flag in the winter olympics in italy . that make I a celebrity . now people recognize I in macy 's , and my grandchild think that I be cool . ( laughter ) allow I to tell you about my four minute of fame . one of the organizer of the olympic ceremony , of the opening ceremony , call I and say that I have be select to be one of the flag - bearer . I reply that surely this be a case of mistaken identity because I be as far as you can get from be an athlete . actually , I be not even sure that I could go around the stadium without a walker . ( laughter ) I be tell that this be no laugh matter . this would be the first time that only woman would carry the olympic flag . five woman , represent five continent , and three olympic gold medal winner . my first question be , naturally , what be I go to wear ? ( laughter ) a uniform , she say , and ask for my measurement . my measurement . I have a vision of myself in a fluffy anorak , look like the michelin man . ( laughter )     by the middle of february , I find myself in turin , where enthusiastic crowd cheer when any of the 80 olympic team be in the street . those athlete have sacrifice everything to compete in the game . you all deserve to win , but there be the element of luck . a speck of snow , an inch of ice , the force of the wind , can determine the result of a race or a game . however , what matter most — more than training or luck — be the heart . only a fearless and determined heart will get the gold medal . it be all about passion . the street of turin be cover with red poster announce the slogan of the olympics .     passion live here . be not it always true ? heart be what drive we and determine our fate . that be what I need for my character in my book : a passionate heart . I need maverick , dissident , adventurer , outsider and rebel , who ask question , bend the rule and take risk . people like all of you in this room . nice people with common sense do not make interesting character . ( laughter ) they only make good former spouse . ( laughter ) ( applause )     in the green room of the stadium , I meet the other flag bearer : three athlete , and the actress susan sarandon and sophia loren . also , two woman with passionate heart : wangari maathai , the nobel prizewinner from kenya who have plant 30 million tree . and by do so , she have change the soil , the weather , in some place in africa , and of course the economic condition in many village . and somaly mam , a cambodian activist who fight passionately against child prostitution . when she be 14 year old , her grandfather sell she to a brothel . she tell we of little girl rape by man who believe that have sex with a very young virgin will cure they from aid . and of brothel where child be force to receive five , 15 client per day , and if they rebel , they be torture with electricity . in the green room I receive my uniform . it be not the kind of outfit that I normally wear , but it be far from the michelin man suit that I have anticipate . not bad , really . I look like a refrigerator . ( laughter ) but so do most of the flag - bearer , except sophia loren , the universal symbol of beauty and passion . sophia be over 70 and she look great . she be sexy , slim and tall , with a deep tan . now , how can you have a deep tan and have no wrinkle ? I do not know . when ask in a tv interview , " how could she look so good ? " she reply , " posture . my back be always straight , and I do not make old people 's noise . " ( laughter ) so , there you have some free advice from one of the most beautiful woman on earth . no grunting , no coughing , no wheezing , no talk to yourself , no farting . ( laughter ) well , she do not say that exactly . ( laughter )     at some point around midnight , we be summon to the wing of the stadium , and the loudspeaker announce the olympic flag , and the music start — by the way , the same music that start here , the aida march . sophia loren be right in front of I — she be a foot tall than I be , not count the poofy hair . ( laughter ) she walk elegantly , like a giraffe on the african savannah , hold the flag on her shoulder . I jog behind ( laughter ) — on my tiptoe — hold the flag on my extended arm , so that my head be actually under the damn flag . ( laughter ) all the camera be , of course , on sophia . that be fortunate for I , because in most press photo I appear too , although often between sophia 's leg . ( laughter ) a place where most man would love to be . ( laughter ) ( applause )     the good four minute of my entire life be those in the olympic stadium . my husband be offend when I say this — although I have explain to he that what we do in private usually take less than four minute — ( laughter ) — so he should not take it personally . I have all the press clipping of those four magnificent minute , because I do not want to forget they when old age destroy my brain cell .     I want to carry in my heart forever the key word of the olympics — passion . so here be a tale of passion . the year be 1998 , the place be a prison camp for tutsi refugee in congo . by the way , 80 percent of all refugee and displace people in the world be woman and girl . we can call this place in congo a death camp , because those who be not kill will die of disease or starvation . the protagonist of this story be a young woman , rise mapendo , and her child . she be pregnant and a widow . soldier have force she to watch as her husband be torture and kill . somehow she manage to keep she seven child alive , and a few month later , she give birth to premature twin . two tiny little boy . she cut the umbilical cord with a stick , and tie it with her own hair . she name the twin after the camp 's commander to gain their favor , and feed they with black tea because her milk can not sustain they . when the soldier burst in her cell to rape her old daughter , she grab hold of she and refuse to let go , even when they hold a gun to her head . somehow , the family survive for 16 month , and then , by extraordinary luck , and the passionate heart of a young american man , sasha chanoff , who manage to put she in a u.s . rescue plane , rise mapendo and her nine child end up in phoenix , arizona , where they be now live and thriving .     mapendo , in swahili , mean great love . the protagonist of my book be strong and passionate woman like rose mapendo . I do not make they up . there be no need for that . I look around and I see they everywhere . I have work with woman and for woman all my life . I know they well . I be bear in ancient time , at the end of the world , in a patriarchal catholic and conservative family . no wonder that by age five I be a rage feminist — although the term have not reach chile yet , so nobody know what the heck be wrong with I . ( laughter ) I would soon find out that there be a high price to pay for my freedom , and for question the patriarchy . but I be happy to pay it , because for every blow that I receive , I be able to deliver two . ( laughter ) once , when my daughter paula be in her twenty , she say to I that feminism be date , that I should move on . we have a memorable fight . feminism be date ? yes , for privileged woman like my daughter and all of we here today , but not for most of our sister in the rest of the world who be still force into premature marriage , prostitution , force labor — they have child that they do not want or they can not feed . they have no control over their body or their life . they have no education and no freedom . they be rape , beat up and sometimes kill with impunity . for most western young woman of today , be call a feminist be an insult . feminism have never be sexy , but let I assure you that it never stop I from flirt , and I have seldom suffer from lack of man . ( laughter ) feminism be not dead , by no mean . it have evolve . if you do not like the term , change it , for goddess ' sake . call it aphrodite , or venus , or bimbo , or whatever you want ; the name do not matter , as long as we understand what it be about , and we support it .     so here be another tale of passion , and this be a sad one . the place be a small woman 's clinic in a village in bangladesh . the year be 2005 . jenny be a young american dental hygienist who have go to the clinic as a volunteer during her three - week vacation . she be prepared to clean tooth , but when she get there , she find out that there be no doctor , no dentist , and the clinic be just a hut full of fly . outside , there be a line of woman who have wait several hour to be treat . the first patient be in excruciating pain because she have several rotten molar . jenny realize that the only solution be to pull out the bad tooth . she be not license for that ; she have never do it . she risk a lot and she be terrified . she do not even have the proper instrument , but fortunately she have bring some novocaine . jenny have a brave and passionate heart . she murmur a prayer and she go ahead with the operation . at the end , the relieved patient kiss her hand . that day the hygienist pull out many more tooth . the next morning , when she come again to the so - call clinic , her first patient be wait for she with her husband . the woman 's face look like a watermelon . it be so swollen that you can not even see the eye . the husband , furious , threaten to kill the american . jenny be horrify at what she have do , but then the translator explain that the patient 's condition have nothing to do with the operation . the day before , her husband beat she up because she be not home in time to prepare dinner for he .     million of woman live like this today . they be the poor of the poor . although woman do two - third of the world 's labor , they own less than one percent of the world 's asset . they be pay less than man for the same work if they be pay at all , and they remain vulnerable because they have no economic independence , and they be constantly threaten by exploitation , violence and abuse . it be a fact that give woman education , work , the ability to control their own income , inherit and own property , benefit the society . if a woman be empower , her child and her family will be well off . if family prosper , the village prosper , and eventually so do the whole country .     wangari maathai go to a village in kenya . she talk with the woman and explain that the land be barren because they have cut and sell the tree . she get the woman to plant new tree and water they , drop by drop . in a matter of five or six year , they have a forest , the soil be enrich , and the village be save . the poor and most backward society be always those that put woman down . yet this obvious truth be ignore by government and also by philanthropy . for every dollar give to a woman 's program , 20 dollar be give to man 's program . woman be 51 percent of humankind . empower they will change everything — more than technology and design and entertainment . I can promise you that woman work together — link , inform and educate — can bring peace and prosperity to this forsaken planet . in any war today , most of the casualty be civilian , mainly woman and child . they be collateral damage . man run the world , and look at the mess we have .     what kind of world do we want ? this be a fundamental question that most of we be ask . do it make sense to participate in the exist world order ? we want a world where life be preserve and the quality of life be enrich for everybody , not only for the privileged . in january I see an exhibit of fernando botero 's painting at the uc berkeley library . no museum or gallery in the united states , except for the new york gallery that carry botero 's work , have dare to show the painting because the theme be the abu ghraib prison . they be huge painting of torture and abuse of power , in the voluminous botero style . I have not be able to get those image out of my mind or my heart . what I fear most be power with impunity . I fear abuse of power , and the power to abuse . in our specie , the alpha male define reality , and force the rest of the pack to accept that reality and follow the rule . the rule change all the time , but they always benefit they , and in this case , the trickle - down effect , which do not work in economic , work perfectly . abuse trickle down from the top of the ladder to the bottom . woman and child , especially the poor , be at the bottom . even the most destitute of man have someone they can abuse — a woman or a child . I be feed up with the power that a few exert over the many through gender , income , race , and class .     I think that the time be ripe to make fundamental change in our civilization . but for real change , we need feminine energy in the management of the world . we need a critical number of woman in position of power , and we need to nurture the feminine energy in man . I be talk about man with young mind , of course . old guy be hopeless ; we have to wait for they to die off . ( laughter ) yes , I would love to have sophia loren 's long leg and legendary breast . but give a choice , I would rather have the warrior heart of wangari maathai , somaly mam , jenny and rise mapendo . I want to make this world good . not well , but to make it good . why not ? it be possible . look around in this room — all this knowledge , energy , talent and technology . let us get off our fanny , roll up our sleeve and get to work , passionately , in create an almost perfect world . thank you .  
   I study ant , and that be because I like to think about how organization work . and in particular , how the simple part of organization interact to create the behavior of the whole organization . so , ant colony be a good example of an organization like that , and there be many other . the web be one . there be many biological system like that — brain , cell , develop embryo .     there be about 10,000 specie of ant . you all live in colony consist of one or a few queen , and then all the ant you see walk around be sterile female worker . and all ant colony have in common that there be no central control . nobody tell anybody what to do . the queen just lay the egg . there be no management . no ant direct the behavior of any other ant . and I try to figure out how that work . and I 've be work for the past 20 year on a population of seed - eat ant in southeastern arizona .     here be my study site . this be really a picture of ant , and the rabbit just happen to be there . and these ant be call harvester ant because they eat seed . this be the nest of the mature colony , and there be the nest entrance . and they forage maybe for about 20 meter away , gather up the seed and bring they back to the nest , and store they . and every year I go there and make a map of my study site . this be just a road . and it be not very big : it be about 250 meter on one side , 400 on the other . and every colony have a name , which be a number , which be paint on a rock . and I go there every year and look for all the colony that be alive the year before , and figure out which one have die , and put all the new one on the map . and by do this I know how old you all be . and because of that , I 've be able to study how their behavior change as the colony get old and large .     so I want to tell you about the life cycle of a colony . ant never make more ant ; colony make more colony . and they do that by each year send out the reproductive — those be the one with wing — on a mating flight . so every year , on the same day — and it be a mystery exactly how that happen — each colony send out its virgin , unmate queen with wing , and the male , and you all fly to a common place . and they mate . and this show a recently virgin queen . here be her wing . and she be in the process of mating with this male , and there be another male on top wait his turn . often the queen mate more than once . and after that , the male all die . that be it for they .     ( laughter )     and then the newly mated queen fly off somewhere , drop their wing , dig a hole and go into that hole and start lay egg . and they will live for 15 or 20 year , continue to lay egg use the sperm from that original mating . so the queen go down in there . she lay egg , she feed the larvae — so an ant start as an egg , then it be a larva . she feed the larvae by regurgitate from her fat reserve . then , as soon as the ant — the first group of ant — emerge , they be larvae . then they be pupa . then they come out as adult ant . they go out , they get the food , they dig the nest , and the queen never come out again .     so this be a one - year - old colony — this happen to be 536 . there be the nest entrance , there be a pencil for scale . so this be the colony found by a queen the previous summer . this be a three - year - old colony . there be the nest entrance , there be a pencil for scale . they make a midden , a pile of refuse — mostly the husk of the seed that they eat . this be a five - year - old colony . this be the nest entrance , here be a pencil for scale . this be about as big as they get , about a meter across . and then this be how colony size and number of worker ant change — so this be about 10,000 worker ant — change as a function of colony age , in year . so it start out with zero ant , just the found queen , and it grow to a size of about 10 or 12 thousand ant when the colony be five . and it stay that size until the queen die and there be nobody to make more ant , when she be about 15 or 20 year old . and it be when they reach this stable size , in number of ant , that they start to reproduce . that is , to send more winged queen and male to that year 's mating flight . and I know how colony size change as a function of colony age because I 've dig up colony of know age and count all the ant . ( laughter ) so that be not the most fun part of this research , although it be interesting .     ( laughter )     really the question that I think about with these ant be what I call task allocation . that be not just how be the colony organize , but how do it change what it be do ? how be it that the colony manage to adjust the number of worker perform each task as condition change ? so , thing happen to an ant colony . when it rain in the summer , it flood in the desert . there be a lot of damage to the nest , and extra ant be need to clean up that mess . when extra food become available — and this be what everybody know about picnic — then extra ant be allocate to collect the food . so , with nobody tell anybody what to do , how be it that the colony manage to adjust the number of worker perform each task ? and that be the process that I call task allocation .     and in harvester ant , I divide the task of the ant I see just outside the nest into these four category : where an ant be forage , when it be out along the forage trail , search for food or bring food back . the patroller — that be suppose to be a magnify glass — be an interesting group that go out early in the morning before the forager be active . they somehow choose the direction that the forager will go , and by come back — just by make it back — they tell the forager that it be safe to go out . then the nest maintenance worker work inside the nest , and I want to say that the nest look a lot like bill lishman 's house . that be , that there be chamber inside , they line the wall of the chamber with moist soil and it dry to a kind of an adobe - like surface in it . it also look very similar to some of the cave dwelling of the hopi people that be in that area . and the nest maintenance worker do that inside the nest , and then they come out of the nest carry bit of dry soil in their mandible . so you see the nest maintenance worker come out with a bit of sand , put it down , turn around , and go back in . and finally , the midden worker put some kind of territorial chemical in the garbage . so what you see the midden worker do be make a pile of refuse . on one day , it 'll all be here , and then the next day they 'll move it over there , and then they 'll move it back . so that be what the midden worker do . and these four group be just the ant outside the nest . so that be only about 25 percent of the colony , and they be the old ant .     so , an ant start out somewhere near the queen . and when we dig up nest we find they be about as deep as the colony be wide , so about a meter deep for the big old nest . and then there be another long tunnel and a chamber , where we often find the queen , after eight hour of hack away at the rock with pickaxe . I do not think that chamber have evolve because of I and my backhoe and my crew of student with pickaxe , but instead because when there be flooding , occasionally the colony have to go down deep . so there be this whole network of chamber . the queen 's in there somewhere ; she just lay egg . there be the larvae , and they consume most of the food . and this be true of most ant — that the ant you see walk around do not do much eating . they bring it back and feed it to the larvae . when the forager come in with food , they just drop it into the upper chamber , and other ant come up from below , get the food , bring it back , husk the seed , and pile they up . there be nest maintenance worker work throughout the nest . and curiously , and interestingly , it look as though at any time about half the ant in the colony be just do nothing . so , despite what it say in the bible , about , you know , " look to the ant , thou sluggard , " in fact , you could think of those ant as reserve . that be to say , if something happen — and I 've never see anything like this happen , but I 've only be look for 20 year — if something happen , they might all come out if they be need . but in fact , mostly they be just hang around in there .     and I think it be a very interesting question — what be there about the way the colony be organize that might give some function to a reserve of ant who be do nothing ? and they sort of stand as a buffer in between the ant work deep inside the nest and the ant work outside . and if you mark ant that be work outside , and dig up a colony , you never see they deep down . so what be happen be that the ant work inside the nest when they be young . they somehow get into this reserve . and then eventually they get recruit to join this exterior workforce . and once they belong to the ant that work outside , they never go back down . now ant — most ant , include these , do not see very well . they have eye , they can distinguish between light and dark , but they mostly work by smell . so just to reinforce that what you might have think about ant queen be not true — you know , even if the queen do have the intelligence to send chemical message through this whole network of chamber to tell the ant outside what to do , there be no way that such message could make it in time to see the shift in the allocation of worker that we actually see outside the nest . so that be one way that we know the queen be not direct the behavior of the colony .     so when I first set out to work on task allocation , my first question be , " what be the relationship between the ant do different task ? do it matter to the forager what the nest maintenance worker be do ? do it matter to the midden worker what the patroller be do ? " and I be work in the context of a view of ant colony in which each ant be somehow dedicated to its task from birth and sort of perform independently of the other , know its place on the assembly line . and instead I want to ask , " how be the different task group interdependent ? "     so I do experiment where I change one thing . so for example , I create more work for the nest maintenance worker by put out a pile of toothpick near the nest entrance , early in the morning when the nest maintenance worker be first active . this be what it look like about 20 minute later . here it be about 40 minute later . and the nest maintenance worker just take all the toothpick to the outer edge of the nest mound and leave they there . and what I want to know be , " ok , here be a situation where extra nest maintenance worker be recruit — be this go to have any effect on the worker perform other task ? " then we repeat all those experiment with the ant mark . so here be some blue nest maintenance worker . and lately we 've get more sophisticated and we have this three - color system . and we can mark they individually so we know which ant be which . we start out with model airplane paint and then we find these wonderful little japanese marker , and they work really well . and so just to summarize the result , well it turn out that yes , the different task be interdependent . so , if I change the number perform one task , it change the number perform another . so for example , if I make a mess that the nest maintenance worker have to clean up , then I see few ant out forage . and this be true for all the pair - wise combination of task .     and the second result , which be surprising to a lot of people , be that ant actually switch task . the same ant do not do the same task over and over its whole life . so for example , if I put out extra food , everybody else — the midden worker stop do midden work and go get the food , they become forager . the nest maintenance worker become forager . the patroller become forager . but not every transition be possible . and this show how it work . like I just say , if there be more food to collect , the patroller , the midden worker , the nest maintenance worker will all change to forage . if there be more patrolling to do — so I create a disturbance , so extra patroller be need — the nest maintenance worker will switch to patrol . but if more nest maintenance work be need — for example , if I put out a bunch of toothpick — then nobody will ever switch back to nest maintenance , they have to get nest maintenance worker from inside the nest . so forage act as a sink , and the ant inside the nest act as a source . and finally , it look like each ant be decide moment to moment whether to be active or not .     so , for example , when there be extra nest maintenance work to do , it be not that the forager switch over . I know that they do not do that . but the forager somehow decide not to come out . and here be the most intriguing result : the task allocation . this process change with colony age , and it change like this . when I do these experiment with old colony — so one that be five year or old — they be much more consistent from one time to another and much more homeostatic . the bad thing get , the more I hassle they , the more they act like undisturbed colony . whereas the young , small colony — the two - year - old colony of just 2,000 ant — be much more variable . and the amazing thing about this be that an ant live only a year . it could be this year , or this year . so , the ant in the old colony that seem to be more stable be not any old than the ant in the young colony . it be not due to the experience of old , wise ant . instead , something about the organization must be change as the colony get old . and the obvious thing that be change be its size .     so since I 've have this result , I 've spend a lot of time try to figure out what kind of decision rule — very simple , local , probably olfactory , chemical rule could an ant could be use , since no ant can assess the global situation — that would have the outcome that I see , these predictable dynamic , in who do what task . and it would change as the colony get large . and what I 've find out be that ant be use a network of antennal contact . so anybody who be ever look at ant have see they touch antennae . they smell with their antennae . when one ant touch another , it be smell it , and it can tell , for example , whether the other ant be a nest mate because ant cover themselves and each other , through groom , with a layer of grease , which carry a colony - specific odor . and what we be learn be that an ant use the pattern of its antennal contact , the rate at which it meet ant of other task , in decide what to do . and so what the message be , be not any message that they transmit from one ant to another , but the pattern . the pattern itself be the message . and I 'll tell you a little bit more about that .     but first you might be wonder : how be it that an ant can tell , for example , I be a forager . I expect to meet another forager every so often . but if instead I start to meet a high number of nest maintenance worker , I be less likely to forage . so it have to know the difference between a forager and a nest maintenance worker . and we 've learn that , in this specie — and I suspect in other as well — these hydrocarbon , this layer of grease on the outside of ant , be different as ant perform different task . and we 've do experiment that show that that be because the long an ant stay outside , the more these simple hydrocarbon on its surface change , and so they come to smell different by do different task . and they can use that task - specific odor in cuticular hydrocarbon — they can use that in their brief antennal contact to somehow keep track of the rate at which they be meet ant of certain task . and we 've just recently demonstrate this by put extract of hydrocarbon on little glass bead , and drop the bead gently down into the nest entrance at the right rate . and it turn out that ant will respond to the right rate of contact with a glass bead with hydrocarbon extract on it , as they would to contact with real ant .     so I want now to show you a bit of film — and this will start out , first of all , show you the nest entrance . so the idea be that ant be come in and out of the nest entrance . they 've go out to do different task , and the rate at which they meet as they come in and out of the nest entrance determine , or influence , each ant 's decision about whether to go out , and which task to perform . this be take through a fiber optic microscope . it be down inside the nest . in the beginning you see the ant just kind of engage with the fiber optic microscope . but the idea be that the ant be in there , and each ant be experience a certain flow of ant past it — a stream of contact with other ant . and the pattern of these interaction determine whether the ant come back out , and what it do when it come back out . you can also see this in the ant just outside the nest entrance like these . each ant , then , as it come back in , be contact other ant . and the ant that be wait just inside the nest entrance to decide whether to go out on their next trip , be contact the ant come in .     so , what be interesting about this system be that it be messy . it be variable . it be noisy . and , in particular , in two way . the first be that the experience of the ant — of each ant — can not be very predictable . because the rate at which ant come back depend on all the little thing that happen to an ant as it go out and do its task outside . and the second thing be that an ant 's ability to assess this pattern must be very crude because no ant can do any sophisticated counting . so , we do a lot of simulation and modeling , and also experimental work , to try to figure out how those two kind of noise combine to , in the aggregate , produce the predictable behavior of ant colony .     again , I do not want to say that this kind of haphazard pattern of interaction produce a factory that work with the precision and efficiency of clockwork . in fact , if you watch ant at all , you end up try to help they because they never seem to be do anything exactly the way that you think that they ought to be do it . so it be not really that out of these haphazard contact , perfection arise . but it work pretty well . ant have be around for several hundred million year . they cover the earth , except for antarctica . something that they be do be clearly successful enough that this pattern of haphazard contact , in the aggregate , produce something that allow ant to make a lot more ant . and one of the thing that we be study be how natural selection might be act now to shape this use of interaction pattern — this network of interaction pattern — to perhaps increase the forage efficiency of ant colony .     so the one thing , though , that I want you to remember about this be that these pattern of interaction be something that you would expect to be closely connect to colony size . the simple idea be that when an ant be in a small colony — and an ant in a large colony can use the same rule , like " I expect to meet another forager every three second . " but in a small colony , it be likely to meet few forager , just because there be few other forager there to meet . so this be the kind of rule that , as the colony develop and get old and large , will produce different behavior in an old colony and a small young one .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   those of we who believe in heaven have some sort of idea of what heaven would be . and in my idea , heaven be satisfied curiosity . I think of heaven as a really comfortable cloud where I can just lie down with my belly down , like I be watch tv when I be a child , and my elbow up . and I can basically look everywhere I want , see every movie I 've always want to see . and in the same kind of trance that you can feel sometimes in the subway in new york when you be read , there be something really soothe and easy .     well , the funny thing be that I already have that kind of life , in a way , because I discover ... it take I a while to understand it , but when I discover around 24 year of age that I be much more comfortable with object than with people , I finally decide to really embrace this passion . and I basically live my life in sort of a trance , and I look around and everything I see be just the beginning of a long story .     just to give you an example : this be the exhibition , humble masterpiece , as it be at moma in 2004 . we be in queen , we be build the big , big , big , big building in midtown , so we be in the small , small , small boondock . that be one of the funn moment of my career .     but it be not only that . the typeface — the typeface be helvetica ; it be its 50th anniversary this year . and so I start think — max miedinger and all those swiss designer together , try to outdo akzidenz - grotesk , and come up with a new san - serif typeface — and the movie start play in my head already . and of course , you can imagine , with humble masterpiece it be the same thing multiply by a hundred . and I do hope , by the way , that the real goal of the exhibition be go to have the same effect on you .     the exhibition be mean to be a way to have child think of do ... you know when they do homework at home ? instead of have a tray with two pea , I be hope that they would go into the kitchen cabinet or the mother 's handbag and do their museum - quality design collection on a tray .     so , everybody be always suggest new humble masterpiece , and at moma we put out some book just for people to suggest their own humble masterpiece . and when you do that , usually you get 80 percent porn and 20 percent real suggestion , and instead it be all — almost — all good suggestion .     and a lot of nationalism come in . for instance , I do not know that the spaniard invent the mop , but they be very proud so every spaniard say " la frego . " and italian do the pizza . and I want to show you , also , the suggestion from kentucky be pretty good — they have moonshine , laundry detergent and liquid nail .     and I keep it go , and I just get , ( laughter ) also , this suggestion from milan : it be our traffic divider , which we call " panettone , " and it be paint ; it be these beautiful concrete thing that you use around milan to define all the lane of traffic . so , think of your own , send they on if you want to — they be always welcome .     but an exhibition like that make I understand even more what I 've be think of for 13 year ever since I get to moma . I be italian . in italy , design be normal . different part of the world have a knack for different thing . I be just recently in argentina and in uruguay , and the default way of build home in the country be a beautiful modernism that you do not see elsewhere , but the contemporary art be terrible .     in italy , in milan especially , contemporary art really do not have that much of a place . but design — oh , my god . what you find at the store at the corner , without go to any kind of fancy store , be the kind of refined design that make everybody think that we be all so sophisticated . it be just what you find at the store .     and new york have another kind of knack for contemporary art . I be always amazed — three - year - old know who richard serra be and take you to the gallery . but design , for some reason , be still misunderstood for decoration . it be really interesting : what many people think when I say the word " design " be they think of this kind of overdesigne — in this case , it be overdesigne on purpose , but — decoration , interior decoration . they think of somebody choose fabric .     design can be that , of course , but it can also be this . it can be a school of design in jerusalem that try to find a well way to design gas mask for people , because , as you know , israel deploy one gas mask per person include baby . so , what these designer do be they find a way to lower the neckline , so that instead of be completely strangle , a teenager can also sip a coke .     they try to make a toddler 's gas mask in such a way that the toddler can be hold by the parent because proximity of the body be so important . and then they make a little tent for the baby . however cruel , however ruthless you can think this be it be a great design , and it be mile away from the fancy furniture , but still , it be part of my same field of passion .     what I 've be do at moma since the beginning be to try to harness the power of moma because it be great to work there . you really have power in that people usually tend to know about your exhibition or see the exhibition , and that be power because in a design museum I would not have as many visitor . I be very well aware that 80 percent of my public be there to see picasso and matisse , and then they stumble upon my show and I keep they there .     but what I 've be try to do be something that the curator at moma in my department have be do ever since the museum be found in 1929 , which be to try and see what be go on in the world and try to use that authority in order to make thing well . there have be many episode , and actually eames demetrius may be here in the audience , but in two instance , his great - grandfather , grandfather — I be always a little perplexed about the relation , exactly — charles eame the first time and then charles and ray eame the second time be involve in two competition : one in 1940 , it be about organic furniture , and the second one in 1948 be low - cost furniture for the gis come back from the war that then spark a whole line of furniture . and then there be good design for very low price . there be a lot of program in architecture and design that be about point people in the direction of a well design for a well life .     so , I start out in ' 95 with this exhibition that be call mutant material in contemporary design . it be about a new phase , in my opinion , in the world of design in that material could be customize by the designer themselves . and that put I in touch with such diverse design example as the aerogel from the lawrence livermore lab in california ; at that time , they be begin to be bring into the civilian market . and at the same time , the gorgeous work of takeshi ishiguro , who do these beautiful salt - and - pepper container that be make of rice dough . so you see , the range be really quite diverse .     and then , for instance , this other exhibition that be entitle worksphere in 2001 , where I ask different designer to come up with idea for the new type of work style that be happen in the world at that time . and you see ideo there . it be beautiful — it be call personal sky . the idea be that if you have a cubicle , you could project a sky on top of your head and have your own " cielo in una stanza " — a sky in a room — it be a very famous italian song .     and other example : this be marti guixe about work on the go , and hella jongerius , my favorite , about how to work at home . and this let I introduce a very important idea about design : designer be the big synthesizer in the world . what they do well be make a synthesis of human need , current condition in economy , in material , in sustainability issue , and then what they do at the end — if they be good — be much more than the sum of its part .     hella jongerius be a person that be able to make a synthesis that be really quite amazing and also quite hilarious . the idea behind her work be that at that time , everybody be say you have to really divide your life . instead , she say , " no , no . work and leisure can be together . " yeah , that be particularly gorgeous — it be the tv dinner of 2001 .     there have be many other exhibition in the meantime , but I do not want to focus on my show . I would like , instead , to talk about how great some designer be . I 've always have a hard time with the word " maverick . " I come to the united states 13 year ago , and to this day I have to ask , " what do that mean ? " so , this morning I go to see on the dictionary and it say that there be this gentleman that be not brand its cattle . therefore , he be not follow everybody 's lead , and therefore , he be a maverick . so , designer do need to be maverick , because the good way to design a successful object — and also an object that we be miss before — be to pretend that either it never exist or that people will be able to have a new behavior with it .     so , safe be the last exhibition that I do at moma and it end at the beginning of last year . it be about design that deal with safety and deal with protection . it be a long story because it start before 2001 and it be call emergency . and then when 9/11 happen , I have a shock and I cancel the exhibition until , slowly but surely , it come back — as a half - full glass instead of half - empty — and it be about protection and safety .     but it range from such item as a complete de - mining equipment to these kind of water - sterilize straw , so it be really wide - range . it also have ... you know , cameron and I work a little bit together , and some of the entry that you see in his website be actually in the exhibition . but what be interesting be that we do not need to talk about design and art anymore ; design use whatever tool it have at its disposal in order to make a point . it be a sense of economy and a sense , also , of humor .     this be a beautiful project by ralph borland , who be south african . it be a suit for civil disobedience . the idea be that when you have a riot or a protest and the police come towards you , you be wear this thing — it be like a big heart and it have a loudspeaker over your heart so your heartbeat be amplify — and the police be remind ; it be like have a flower in front of the rifle . and also , you can imagine , a whole group of people with the same suit will have this mount collective heartbeat that will be scary to the police .     so , designer sometimes do not do thing that be immediately functional , but they be functional to our understanding of issue . tony dunne and fiona raby do this series of object that be about our anguish and our paranoia , like this hideaway furniture that be make in the same wood as your floor so it disappear completely and you can hide away ; or even well , the huggable atomic mushroom , which get I an article on the bulletin of atomic scientist of the united states — I do not think it ever happen before at moma ; or this faraday chair that be suppose to protect you from radiation .     but the interesting thing in the exhibition be the discovery that the ultimate shelter be your sense of self , and there be quite a few designer that be work on this particular topic . this be cindy van den breman , who be a dutch designer that be do this series of capster . they be athletic gear for muslim woman that enable they to ski , play tennis , do whatever they want to do without have to uncap themselves .     and sometimes by do this kind of research , you encounter such beautiful idea of design . twan verdonck be really young , I think he be 27 , and work together with some psychologist he do a series of toy that be for sensorial stimulation for child that have psychological impairment . they be quite beautiful . they range from this fluffy toy that be about hug you — because autistic child like to be hug tight , so it have a spring inside — all the way to this doll with a mirror so the child can see he or herself in the mirror and regain a sense of self .     design really look upon the whole world and it consider the world in all of its different range . I be recently at a conference on luxury organize by the herald tribune in istanbul . and it be really interesting because I be the last speaker and before I there be people that be really talk about luxury , and I do not want to be a party pooper but at the same time I feel that I have to kind of bring back the discourse to reality .     and the truth be that there be very different kind of luxury , and there be luxury that be relative for people that do not have that much . I want to make this point by show you two example of design come from a sense of economy — very , very clear limit . this be cuba , and this be the recycling of a squeaky toy as a bicycle bell , and this be a raincoat that be make out of rice sack . so they be quite beautiful , but they be beautiful because they be so smart and economical .     and here be the work of two brother from sao paulo , fernando and humberto campana , who got inspire by the poverty and smartness that they see around they to do piece of furniture that now be sell for an enormous amount of money . but that be because of the kind of strangeness of the market itself .     so really , design take everything into account , and the interesting thing be that as the technology advance , as we become more and more wireless and impalpable , designer , instead , want we to be hand - on . sometimes hammer - on . this be a whole series of furniture that want to engage you physically . even this chair that you have to open up and then sit on so that it take your imprint , all the way to this beautiful series of object that be consider design by ana mir in barcelona . from this kind of bijou make with human hair to these chocolate nipple to these intra - toe candy that your lover be suppose to suck from your toe . ( laughter )     it be quite beautiful because somehow , this be a gorgeous moment for design . many year ago I hear a mathematician from vienna , whose name be marchetti , explain how the innovation in the military industry — therefore , secret innovation — and the innovation in the civilian society be two sinusoid that be kind of opposed . and that make sense . in moment of war there be great technological innovation , and in the world you have to do without — well , during the second world war , you have to do without steel , you have to do without aluminum . and then as peace come , all of these technology get all of a sudden available for the civilian market . many of you might know that the potato chip chair by charles and ray eame come exactly from that kind of instance : fiberglas be available for civilian use all of a sudden .     I think that this be a strange moment . the rhythm of the sinusoid have change tremendously , just like the rhythm of our life in the past 25 year , so I be not sure anymore what the wavelength be . but it surely be a very important moment for design , because not only be the technology proceeding , not only be compute technology make open - source possible also in the world of design , but also the idea of sustainability — which be not only sustainability from the viewpoint of co2 emission and footprint , but also sustainability of human interrelationship — be very much part of the work of so many designer . and that be why designer , more and more , be work on behavior rather than on object . especially the good one , not all of they .     I want to show you , for instance , the work of mathieu lehanneur , which be quite fantastic . he be another young designer from france who be work — and at this point he be work , also , with pharmaceutical company — on new way to engage patient , especially child , in take their medicine with constancy and with certainty .     for instance , this be a beautiful container for asthma medicine that kind of inflate itself when it be time for you to take the medicine , so the child have to go — pffff ! — to release and relieve the container itself . and this other medicine be something that you can draw on your skin , so intradermal delivery enable you to joyfully be involve in this particular kind of delivery . similarly , there be the work of people like marti guixe that try to involve you in a way that be really about make everything pass through your mouth so that you learn from your mistake or from your taste , orally .     the next show that I be go to work on — and I 've be bug a lot of you about this here — be about the relationship between design and science . I be try to find not the metaphor , but , rather , the point in common — the common gripe , the common issue , the common preoccupation — and I think that it will enable we to go a little far in this idea of design as an instruction , as a direction rather than a prescription of form .     and I be hope that many of you will respond to this . I 've send an email already to quite a few of you . but design and science and the possibility of visualize different scale , and therefore , really work at the scale of the very small to make it very big and very meaningful . thank you . ( applause )  
   I be go to talk about two story today . one be how we need to use market - base pricing to affect demand and use wireless technology to dramatically reduce our emission in the transportation sector . and the other be that there be an incredible opportunity if we choose the right wireless technology ; how we can generate a new engine for economic growth and dramatically reduce c02 in the other sector .     I be really scared . we need to reduce c02 emission in ten to fifteen year by 80 percent in order to avert catastrophic effect . and I be astounded that I be stand here to tell you that . what be catastrophic effect ? a three degree centigrade climate change rise that will result in 50 percent specie extinction . it be not a movie . this be real life . and I be really worried , because when people talk about car — which I know something about — the press and politician and people in this room be all think , " let us use fuel - efficient car . " if we start today , 10 year from now , at the end of this window of opportunity , those fuel - efficient car will reduce our fossil fuel need by four percent . that be not enough .     but now I 'll talk about some more pleasant thing . here be some way that we can make some dramatic change . so , zipcar be a company that I found seven year ago , but it be an example of something call car sharing . what zipcar do be we park car throughout dense urban area for member to reserve , by the hour and by the day , instead of use their own car . how do it feel to be a person use a zipcar ? it mean that I pay only for what I need . all those hour when a car be sit idle , I be not pay for it . it mean that I can choose a car exactly for that particular trip . so , here be a woman that reserve minimia , and she have her day . I can take a bmw when I be see client . I can drive my toyota element when I be go to go on that surfing trip .     and the other remarkable thing be it be , I think , the high status of car ownership . not only do I have a fleet of car available to I in seven city around the world that I can have at my beck and call , but heaven forbid I would ever maintain or deal with the repair or have anything to do with it . it be like the car that you always want that your mom say that you could not have . I get all the good stuff and none of the bad .     so , what be the social result of this ? the social result be that today 's zipcar have 100,000 member drive 3,000 car park in 3,000 parking space . instead of drive 12,000 mile a year , which be what the average city dweller do , they drive 500 mile a year . be they happy ? the company have be double in size ever since I found it , or great . people adore the company . and it be well , you know ? they like it . so , how be it that people go from the 12,000 mile a year to 500 mile ? it be because they say , " it be eight to 10 dollar an hour and 65 dollar a day . if I be go to go buy some ice cream , do I really want to spend eight dollar to go buy the ice cream ? or maybe I 'll do without . maybe I would have buy the ice cream when I do some other errand . " so , people really respond very quickly to it , to price .     and the last point I want to make be zipcar would never be possible without technology . it require that it be completely trivial : that it take 30 second to reserve a car , go get it , drive it . and for I , as a service provider , I would never be able to provide you a car for an hour if the transaction cost be anything . so , without these wireless technology , this , as a concept , could never happen .     so , here be another example . this company be goloco — I be launch it in about three week — and I hope to do for rideshare what I do for car sharing . this will apply to people across all of america . today , 75 percent of the trip be single - occupancy vehicle , yet 12 percent of trip to work be currently carpool . and I think that we can apply social network and online payment system to completely change how people feel about ridesharing and make that trip much more efficient .     and so when I think about the future , people will be think that share the ride with someone be this incredibly great social event out of their day . you know , how do you get to ted ? you go with other tedster . how fabulous . why would you ever want to go by yourself in your own car ? how do you go food shopping ? you go with your neighbor , what a great social time . you know it be go to really transform how we feel about travel , and it will also , I think , enhance our freedom of mobility . where can I go today and who can I do it with ? those be the type of thing that you will look at and feel .     and the social benefit : the rate of single - occupancy vehicle be , I tell you , 75 percent ; I think we can get that down to 50 percent . the demand for parking , of course , be down , congestion and the co2 emission . one last piece about this , of course , be that it be enable by wireless technology . and it be the cost of drive that be make people want to be able to do this . the average american spend 19 percent of their income on their car , and there be a pressure for they to reduce that cost , yet they have no outlet today .     so , the last example of this be congestion pricing , very famously do in london . it be when you charge a premium for people to drive on congested road . in london , the day they turn the congestion pricing on , there be a 25 percent decrease in congestion overnight , and that be persist for the four year in which they 've be do congestion pricing . and again , do people like the outcome ? ken livingstone be reelect . so again , we can see that price play an enormous role in people 's willingness to reduce their drive behavior . we 've triple the mile that we drive since 1970 and double they since 1982 . there be a huge slack in that system ; with the right pricing we can undo that .     congestion pricing be be discuss in every major city around the world and be , again , wirelessly enable . you be not go to put tollbooth around the city of london and open and shut those gate . and what congestion pricing be be that it be a technology trial and a psychological trial for something call road pricing . and road pricing be where we be all go to have to go , because today we pay for our maintenance and wear and tear on our car with gas taxis . and as we get our car more fuel - efficient , that be go to be reduce the amount of revenue that you get off of those gas taxis , so we need to charge people by the mile that they drive . whatever happen with congestion pricing and those technology will be happen with road pricing .     why do we travel too much ? car travel be underprice and therefore we over - consume . we need to put this well market feedback . and if we have it , you 'll decide how many mile to drive , what mode of travel , where to live and work . and wireless technology make this real - time loop possible .     so , I want to move now to the second part of my story , which be : when be we go to start do this congestion pricing ? road pricing be come . when be we go to do it ? be we go to wait 10 to 15 year for this to happen or be we go to finally have this political will to make it happen in the next two year ? because I be go to say , that be go to be the tool that be go to turn our usage overnight .     and what kind of wireless technology be we go to use ? this be my big vision . there be a tool that can help we bridge the digital divide , respond to emergency , get traffic move , provide a new engine for economic growth and dramatically reduce co2 emission in every sector . and this be a moment from " the graduate . " do you remember this moment ? you guy be go to be the handsome young guy and I be go to be the wise businessman . " I want to say one word to you , just one word . " " yes , sir ? " " be you listen ? " " yes I be . " " ad - hoc peer - to - peer self - configure wireless network . " ( laughter ) these be also call mesh network . and in a mesh , every device contribute to and expand the network , and I think you might have hear a little bit about it before .     I be go to give you some example . you 'll be hear later today from alan kay . these laptop , when a child open they up , they communicate with every single child in the classroom , within that school , within that village . and what be the cost of that communication system ? zero dollar a month . here be another example : in new orleans , video camera be mesh - enable so that they could monitor crime in the downtown french quarter . when the hurricane happen , the only communication system standing be the mesh network . volunteer fly in , add a whole bunch of device , and for the next 12 month , mesh network be the only wireless that be happen in new orleans .     another example be in portsmouth , u.k . they mesh - enable 300 bus and they speak to these smart terminal . you can look at the terminal and be able to see precisely where your bus be on the street and when it be come , and you can buy your ticket in real time . again , all mesh - enabled . monthly communication cost : zero . so , the beauty of mesh network : you can have these very low - cost device . zero ongoing communication cost . highly scalable ; you can just keep add they , and as in katrina , you can keep subtract they — as long as there be some , we can still communicate . they be resilient ; their redundancy be build into this fabulous decentralized design .     what be the incredible weakness ? there be not anybody in washington lobby to make it happen — or in those municipality , to build out their city with these wireless network — because there be zero ongoing communication cost . so , the example that I give you be these island of mesh network , and network be interesting only as they be big .     how do we create a big network ? be you guy ready again — " the graduate " ? this time you will still play the handsome young thing , but I 'll be the sexy woman . these be the next two line in the movie . " where do you do it ? " " in his car . " so you know , when you stick this idea ... ( laughter ) where would we expect I , robin chase , to be think be imagine if we put a mesh - network device in every single car across america . we could have a coast - to - coast , free wireless communication system . I guess I just want you to think about that .     and why be this go to happen ? because we be go to do congestion pricing , we be go to do road toll , gas taxis be go to become road pricing . these thing be go to happen . what be the wireless technology we be go to use ? maybe we should use a good one . when be we go to do it ? maybe we should not wait for the 10 or 15 year for this to happen . we should pull it forward .     so , I would like we to launch the wireless internet interstate wireless mesh system , and require that this network be accessible to everyone , with open standard . right now in the transportation sector , we be create these wireless device — I guess you guy might have fast pass here or easy lane — that be single - purpose device in these closed network . what be the point ? we be transfer just a few little datum bit when we be do road control , road pricing . we have this incredible excess capacity . so , we can provide the low - cost mean of go wireless coast - to - coast , we can have resilient nationwide communication system , we have a new tool for create efficiency in all sector . imagine what happen when the cost of get information from anywhere to anywhere be close to zero . what you can do with that tool : we can create an economic engine . information should be free , and access to information should be free , and we should be charge people for carbon .     I think this be a more powerful tool than the interstate highway act , and I think this be as important and world change to our economy as electrification . and if I have my druther , we would have an open - source version in addition to open standard . and this open - source version mean that it could be — if we do a brilliant job of it — it could be use around the world very quickly . so , go back to one of my early thought . imagine if every one of these bus in lagos be part of the mesh network . when I go this morning to larry brilliant 's tedtalk prize — his fabulous network — imagine if there be an open - source mesh communication device that can be put into those network , to make all that happen . and we can be do it if we could just get over the fact that this little slice of thing be go to be for free . we could make billion of dollar on top of it , but this one particular slice of communication need to be open source .     so , let us take control of this nightmare : implement a gas tax immediately ; transition across the nation to road - tolling with this wireless mesh ; require that the mesh be open to all , with open standard ; and , of course , use mesh network . thank you . ( applause )  
   ( music )     ( applause )     thank you . ooh , I be like , " phew , phew , calm down . get back into my body now . " ( laughter )     usually when I play out , the first thing that happen be people scream out , " what be she do ? ! " I 'll play at these rock show , be on stage standing completely still , and they be like , " what be she do ? ! what be she do ? ! " and then I 'll kind of be like — ( vvvwow ! ) — and then they be like , " whoa ! " ( laughter )     I be sure you be try to figure out , " well , how do this thing work ? " well , what I be do be control the pitch with my left hand . see , the close I get to this antenna , the high the note get — ( portamento ) — and you can get it really low . and with this hand I be control the volume , so the further away my right hand get , the loud it get . ( tone ) so basically , with both of your hand you be control pitch and volume and kind of try to create the illusion that you be do separate note , when really it be continuously go ... ( flourish ... beep ) ( laughter )     sometimes I startle myself : I 'll forget that I have it on , and I 'll lean over to pick up something , and then it go like — ( blip ) — " oh ! " and it be like a funny sound effect that follow you around if you do not turn the thing off . ( laughter )     maybe we 'll go into the next tune , because I totally lose where this be go . we be go to do a song by david mash call " listen : the word be go , " and maybe I 'll have word come back into I afterwards if I can relax .     ( music )     ( applause )     so , I be try to think of some of the question that be commonly ask ; there be so many . and ... well , I guess I could tell you a little of the history of the theremin . it be invent around the 1920 , and the inventor , léon theremin — he also be a musician besides an inventor — he come up with the idea for make the theremin , I think , when he be work on some shortwave radio . and there would be that sound in the signal — it be like ( screech ) — and he think , " oh , what if I could control that sound and turn it into an instrument , because there be pitch in it . " and so somehow through develop that , he eventually come to make the theremin the way it be now .     and a lot of time , even kid nowadays , they 'll make reference to a theremin by go , " whoo - hoo - hoo - hoo , " because in the ' 50 it be use in the sci - fi horror movie , that sound that be like ... ( woo - hoo - hoo - hoo ) ( laughter ) it be kind of a funny , goofy sound to do .     and sometimes if I have too much coffee , then my vibrato get out of hand . you be really sensitive to your body and its function when you be behind this thing . you have to stay so still if you want to have the most control . it remind I of the balancing act early on — what michael be do — because you be fight so hard to keep the balance with what you be play with and stay in tune , and at the same time you do not want to focus so much on be in tune all the time ; you want to be feel the music .     and then also , you be try to stay very , very , very still because little movement with other part of your body will affect the pitch , or sometimes if you be hold a low note — ( tone rise out of key ) — and breathing will make it ...     ( laughter )      if I pass out on the next song ... ( laughter )     I think of it almost like like a yoga instrument because it make you so aware of every little crazy thing your body be do , or just aware of what you do not want it to be do while you be play ; you do not want to have any sudden movement . and if I go to a club and play a gig , people be like , " here , have some drink on we ! " and it be like , " well , I be about to go on soon ; I do not want to be like — ( teetering tone ) — you know ? "     it really do reflect the mood that you be in also , if you be ... it be similar to be a vocalist , except instead of it come out of your throat , you be control it just in the air and you do not really have a point of reference ; you be always rely on your ear and adjust constantly . you just have to always adjust to what be happen and realize you 'll have bummer note come here and there and listen to it , adjust it , and just move on , or else you 'll get too tie up and go crazy . like I .     I think we will play another tune now . I be go to do " lush life . " it be one of my favorite tune to play .     ( music )     ( applause )  
   ♫ jill sobule : at a conference in monterey by the big , big jellyfish tank , ♫     ♫ I first see you and I get so shy . ♫     ♫ you see , I be a little paranoid 'cause I might have be high . ♫     ♫ and I have not do that in age and I will not do that again . ♫     ♫ but that be another story . ♫     ♫ love you forever and I 've be a big fan , ♫     ♫ the one - woman show , I even rent " pat . " ♫     ♫ I get enough nerve to come up to you , ♫     ♫ but little do I know one year later we would be do this show . ♫     ♫ I sing . julia sweeney : I tell story . together : the jill and julia show . ♫     ♫ sobule : sometimes it work . sweeney : sometimes it do not . ♫     ♫ together : the jill and julia show . ♫     ♫ sweeney : at a conference in monterey next to the big , big jellyfish tank , ♫     ♫ I first see you and I be not so shy . ♫     I make a beeline for you and tell you what a huge fan I be ever since I be write that pilot for fox , and wendy and I want you to do the theme song . and then the pilot do not go and I be so sad , but I keep remain a fan of your . and then when I go through that big , horrible breakup with carl and I could not get off the couch , I listen to your song , ♫ " now that I do not have you , " ♫ over and over and over and over again . and I can not believe you be here and that I be meet you here at ted . and also , I can not believe that we be eat sushi in front of the fish tank , which , personally , I think be really inappropriate . ( laughter ) ( applause )     and little do I know that one year later ... ♫ we would be do this show . ♫     ♫ sobule : I sing . sweeney : I tell story . together : the jill and julia show . ♫     sobule : hey , they ask we back ! sweeney : can you stand it ? !     ♫ together : the jill and julia , the jill and julia , the jill and julia show . ♫     ♫ sobule : why be all our hero so imperfect ? ♫     ♫ why do they always bring I down ? ♫     ♫ why be all our hero so imperfect ? ♫     ♫ statue in the park have lose his crown . ♫     ♫ william faulkner , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : mmm .     ♫ dorothy parker , mean , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : I know .     ♫ and that guy , " seven year in tibet , " turn out to be a nazi . ♫ sweeney : yeah .     ♫ found father all have slave . ♫ sweeney : I know .     ♫ the explorer slaughter the brave . ♫ sweeney : horribly .     ♫ sobule : the old testament god can be so petty . ♫     sweeney : do not get I start on that . ( laughter )     ♫ sobule : paul mccartney , jealous of john , even more so now that he be go . ♫     ♫ dylan be so mean to donovan in that movie . ♫     ♫ pablo picasso , cruel to his wife . ♫ sweeney : horrible .     ♫ sobule : my favorite poet take their own life . ♫     ♫ orson welle peak at twenty - five , below before our eye . ♫     ♫ and he sell bad wine . ♫     ♫ together : why be all our hero so imperfect ? yeah ♫     ♫ why do they always bring I down ? ♫     ♫ sobule : hear babe ruth be full of malice . ♫ sweeney : oh .     ♫ lewis carroll I be sure do alice . ♫ sweeney : what ? !     ♫ plato in the cave with those very young boy . ♫ sweeney : ooh ...     ♫ sobule : hillary support the war . ♫     ♫ sweeney : even thomas friedman support the war . ♫ ( laughter )     ♫ sobule : colin powell turn out to be ... together : ... such a pussy . ♫ ( laughter ) ( applause )     ♫ sobule : william faulkner , drunk and depressed , ♫     ♫ tennessee williams , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : yeah .     ♫ sobule : take it , julia . ♫     sweeney : okay . oprah be never necessarily a big hero of mine . I mean , I watch oprah mostly when I be home in spokane visit my mother . and to my mother , oprah be a great moral authority than the pope , which be actually say something because she be a devout catholic . anyway , I like oprah — I like her girlfriendy - ness , I like her weight issue , I like how she be transform talk television , I like how she be bring read back to america — but there be something that happen the last two week that be ... I call it the soon - yi moment : it be the moment when I can not continue support someone . and that be that she do two entire show promote that movie " the secret . " do you guy know about that movie " the secret " ? it make " what the bleep do we know " seem like a doctoral dissertation from harvard on quantum mechanic — that be how bad it be . it make " the davinci code " seem like " war and peace . " that movie be so horrible . it promote such awful pseudoscience . and the basic idea be that there be this law of attraction , and your thought have this vibrate energy that go out into the universe and then you attract good thing to happen to you . on a scientific basis , it be more than just " power of positive thinking " — it have a horrible , horrible dark side . like if you get ill , it be because you 've just be think negative thought . yeah , stuff like that be in the movie and she be promote it . and all I be say be that I really wish that murray gell - mann would go on oprah and just explain to she that the law of attraction be , in fact , not a law . so that be what I have to say . ( laughter )     ( applause )     ♫ sobule : I sing . sweeney : I tell story . together : the jill and julia show . ♫     ♫ sobule : sometimes it work . sweeney : sometimes it do not . ♫     ♫ together : the jill and julia , the jill and julia , the jill and julia show . ♫     ( applause )  
   I grow up to study the brain because I have a brother who have be diagnose with a brain disorder , schizophrenia . and as a sister and later , as a scientist , I want to understand , why be it that I can take my dream , I can connect they to my reality , and I can make my dream come true ? what be it about my brother 's brain and his schizophrenia that he can not connect his dream to a common and share reality , so they instead become delusion ?     so I dedicate my career to research into the severe mental illness . and I move from my home state of indiana to boston , where I be work in the lab of dr . francine bene , in the harvard department of psychiatry . and in the lab , we be ask the question , " what be the biological difference between the brain of individual who would be diagnose as normal control , as compare with the brain of individual diagnose with schizophrenia , schizoaffective or bipolar disorder ? "     so we be essentially map the microcircuitry of the brain : which cell be communicate with which cell , with which chemical , and then in what quantity of those chemical ? so there be a lot of meaning in my life because I be perform this type of research during the day , but then in the evening and on the weekend , I travel as an advocate for nami , the national alliance on mental illness .     but on the morning of december 10 , 1996 , I wake up to discover that I have a brain disorder of my own . a blood vessel explode in the left half of my brain . and in the course of four hour , I watch my brain completely deteriorate in its ability to process all information . on the morning of the hemorrhage , I could not walk , talk , read , write or recall any of my life . I essentially become an infant in a woman 's body .     if you 've ever see a human brain , it be obvious that the two hemisphere be completely separate from one another . and I have bring for you a real human brain .     ( groaning , laughter )     so this be a real human brain . this be the front of the brain , the back of brain with the spinal cord hang down , and this be how it would be position inside of my head . and when you look at the brain , it be obvious that the two cerebral cortex be completely separate from one another .     for those of you who understand computer , our right hemisphere function like a parallel processor , while our left hemisphere function like a serial processor . the two hemisphere do communicate with one another through the corpus callosum , which be make up of some 300 million axonal fiber . but other than that , the two hemisphere be completely separate . because they process information differently , each of our hemisphere think about different thing , they care about different thing , and , dare I say , they have very different personality . excuse I . thank you . it be be a joy .     assistant : it have be .     ( laughter )     our right human hemisphere be all about this present moment . it be all about " right here , right now . " our right hemisphere , it think in picture and it learn kinesthetically through the movement of our body . information , in the form of energy , stream in simultaneously through all of our sensory system and then it explode into this enormous collage of what this present moment look like , what this present moment smell like and taste like , what it feel like and what it sound like . I be an energy - being connect to the you all around I through the consciousness of my right hemisphere . we be energy - being connect to one another through the consciousness of our right hemisphere as one human family . and right here , right now , we be brother and sister on this planet , here to make the world a well place . and in this moment we be perfect , we be whole and we be beautiful .     my left hemisphere , our left hemisphere , be a very different place . our left hemisphere think linearly and methodically . our left hemisphere be all about the past and it be all about the future . our left hemisphere be design to take that enormous collage of the present moment and start pick out detail , and more detail about those detail . it then categorize and organize all that information , associate it with everything in the past we 've ever learn , and project into the future all of our possibility . and our left hemisphere think in language . it be that ongoing brain chatter that connect I and my internal world to my external world . it be that little voice that say to I , " hey , you 've get to remember to pick up banana on your way home . I need they in the morning . " it be that calculate intelligence that remind I when I have to do my laundry . but perhaps most important , it be that little voice that say to I , " I be . I be . "     and as soon as my left hemisphere say to I " I be , " I become separate . I become a single solid individual , separate from the energy flow around I and separate from you . and this be the portion of my brain that I lose on the morning of my stroke .     on the morning of the stroke , I wake up to a pound pain behind my left eye . and it be the kind of caustic pain that you get when you bite into ice cream . and it just grip I — and then it release I . and then it just grip I — and then it release I . and it be very unusual for I to ever experience any kind of pain , so I think , " ok , I 'll just start my normal routine . "     so I get up and I jump onto my cardio glider , which be a full - body , full - exercise machine . and I be jam away on this thing , and I be realize that my hand look like primitive claw grasp onto the bar . and I think , " that be very peculiar . " and I look down at my body and I think , " whoa , I be a weird - look thing . " and it be as though my consciousness have shift away from my normal perception of reality , where I be the person on the machine have the experience , to some esoteric space where I be witness myself have this experience .     and it be all very peculiar , and my headache be just get bad . so I get off the machine , and I be walk across my living room floor , and I realize that everything inside of my body have slow way down . and every step be very rigid and very deliberate . there be no fluidity to my pace , and there be this constriction in my area of perception , so I be just focus on internal system . and I be stand in my bathroom get ready to step into the shower , and I could actually hear the dialogue inside of my body . I hear a little voice say , " ok . you muscle , you 've get to contract . you muscle , you relax . "     and then I lose my balance , and I be prop up against the wall . and I look down at my arm and I realize that I can no long define the boundary of my body . I can not define where I begin and where I end , because the atom and the molecule of my arm blend with the atom and molecule of the wall . and all I could detect be this energy — energy .     and I be ask myself , " what be wrong with I ? what be go on ? " and in that moment , my left hemisphere brain chatter go totally silent . just like someone take a remote control and push the mute button . total silence . and at first I be shocked to find myself inside of a silent mind . but then I be immediately captivate by the magnificence of the energy around I . and because I could no long identify the boundary of my body , I feel enormous and expansive . I feel at one with all the energy that be , and it be beautiful there .     then all of a sudden my left hemisphere come back online and it say to I , " hey ! we 've get a problem ! we 've get to get some help . " and I be go , " ahh ! I 've get a problem ! "     ( laughter )     so it be like , " ok , I 've get a problem . " but then I immediately drift right back out into the consciousness — and I affectionately refer to this space as la la land . but it be beautiful there . imagine what it would be like to be totally disconnected from your brain chatter that connect you to the external world .     so here I be in this space , and my job , and any stress relate to my job — it be go . and I feel light in my body . and imagine all of the relationship in the external world and any stressor relate to any of those — they be go . and I feel this sense of peacefulness . and imagine what it would feel like to lose 37 year of emotional baggage ! ( laughter ) oh ! I feel euphoria — euphoria . it be beautiful .     and again , my left hemisphere come online and it say , " hey ! you 've get to pay attention . we 've get to get help . " and I be think , " I 've get to get help . I 've get to focus . " so I get out of the shower and I mechanically dress and I be walk around my apartment , and I be think , " I 've get to get to work . can I drive ? "     and in that moment , my right arm go totally paralyzed by my side . then I realize , " oh my gosh ! I be have a stroke ! " and the next thing my brain say to I be , wow ! this be so cool !     ( laughter )     this be so cool ! how many brain scientist have the opportunity to study their own brain from the inside out ? "     ( laughter )     and then it cross my mind , " but I be a very busy woman ! "     ( laughter )     " I do not have time for a stroke ! " so I be like , " ok , I can not stop the stroke from happen , so I 'll do this for a week or two , and then I 'll get back to my routine . ok . so I 've get to call help . I 've get to call work . " I could not remember the number at work , so I remember , in my office I have a business card with my number . so I go into my business room , I pull out a three - inch stack of business card . and I be look at the card on top and even though I could see clearly in my mind 's eye what my business card look like , I could not tell if this be my card or not , because all I could see be pixel . and the pixel of the word blend with the pixel of the background and the pixel of the symbol , and I just could not tell . and then I would wait for what I call a wave of clarity . and in that moment , I would be able to reattach to normal reality and I could tell that be not the card ... that be not the card . it take I 45 minute to get one inch down inside of that stack of card . in the meantime , for 45 minute , the hemorrhage be get big in my left hemisphere . I do not understand number , I do not understand the telephone , but it be the only plan I have .     so I take the phone pad and I put it right here . I take the business card , I put it right here , and I be match the shape of the squiggle on the card to the shape of the squiggle on the phone pad . but then I would drift back out into la la land , and not remember when I come back if I would already dial those number . so I have to wield my paralyzed arm like a stump and cover the number as I go along and push they , so that as I would come back to normal reality , I would be able to tell , " yes , I 've already dial that number . "     eventually , the whole number gets dial and I be listen to the phone , and my colleague pick up the phone and he say to I , " woo woo woo woo . " ( laughter )     ( laughter )     and I think to myself , " oh my gosh , he sound like a golden retriever ! "     ( laughter )     and so I say to he — clear in my mind , I say to he : " this be jill ! I need help ! " and what come out of my voice be , " woo woo woo woo woo . " I be think , " oh my gosh , I sound like a golden retriever . " so I could not know — I do not know that I could not speak or understand language until I try . so he recognize that I need help and he get I help .     and a little while later , I be ride in an ambulance from one hospital across boston to [ massachusetts ] general hospital . and I curl up into a little fetal ball . and just like a balloon with the last bit of air , just right out of the balloon , I just feel my energy lift and just I feel my spirit surrender .     and in that moment , I know that I be no long the choreographer of my life . and either the doctor rescue my body and give I a second chance at life , or this be perhaps my moment of transition .     when I wake later that afternoon , I be shocked to discover that I be still alive . when I feel my spirit surrender , I say goodbye to my life . and my mind be now suspend between two very opposite plane of reality . stimulation come in through my sensory system feel like pure pain . light burn my brain like wildfire , and sound be so loud and chaotic that I could not pick a voice out from the background noise , and I just want to escape . because I could not identify the position of my body in space , I feel enormous and expansive , like a genie just liberate from her bottle . and my spirit soar free , like a great whale glide through the sea of silent euphoria . nirvana . I find nirvana . and I remember think , there be no way I would ever be able to squeeze the enormousness of myself back inside this tiny little body .     but then I realize , " but I be still alive ! I be still alive , and I have find nirvana . and if I have find nirvana and I be still alive , then everyone who be alive can find nirvana . " and I picture a world fill with beautiful , peaceful , compassionate , love people who know that they could come to this space at any time . and that they could purposely choose to step to the right of their left hemisphere — and find this peace . and then I realize what a tremendous gift this experience could be , what a stroke of insight this could be to how we live our life . and it motivate I to recover .     two and a half week after the hemorrhage , the surgeon go in , and they remove a blood clot the size of a golf ball that be push on my language center . here I be with my mama , who be a true angel in my life . it take I eight year to completely recover .     so who be we ? we be the life - force power of the universe , with manual dexterity and two cognitive mind . and we have the power to choose , moment by moment , who and how we want to be in the world . right here , right now , I can step into the consciousness of my right hemisphere , where we be . I be the life - force power of the universe . I be the life - force power of the 50 trillion beautiful molecular genius that make up my form , at one with all that be . or , I can choose to step into the consciousness of my left hemisphere , where I become a single individual , a solid . separate from the flow , separate from you . I be dr . jill bolte taylor : intellectual , neuroanatomist . these be the " we " inside of I . which would you choose ? which do you choose ? and when ? I believe that the more time we spend choose to run the deep inner - peace circuitry of our right hemisphere , the more peace we will project into the world , and the more peaceful our planet will be . and I think that be an idea worth spread .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   well , this be such an honor . and it be wonderful to be in the presence of an organization that be really make a difference in the world . and I be intensely grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today .     and I be also rather surprised , because when I look back on my life the last thing I ever want to do be write , or be in any way involve in religion . after I leave my convent , I would finish with religion , frankly . I think that be it . and for 13 year I keep clear of it . I want to be an english literature professor . and I certainly do not even want to be a writer , particularly . but then I suffer a series of career catastrophe , one after the other , and finally find myself in television . ( laughter ) I say that to bill moyer , and he say , " oh , we take anybody . " ( laughter )     and I be do some rather controversial religious program . this go down very well in the u.k . , where religion be extremely unpopular . and so , for once , for the only time in my life , I be finally in the mainstream . but I got send to jerusalem to make a film about early christianity . and there , for the first time , I encounter the other religious tradition : judaism and islam , the sister religion of christianity . and while I find I know nothing about these faith at all — despite my own intensely religious background , I would see judaism only as a kind of prelude to christianity , and I know nothing about islam at all .     but in that city , that tortured city , where you see the three faith jostle so uneasily together , you also become aware of the profound connection between they . and it have be the study of other religious tradition that bring I back to a sense of what religion can be , and actually enable I to look at my own faith in a different light .     and I find some astonishing thing in the course of my study that have never occur to I . frankly , in the day when I think I would have it with religion , I just find the whole thing absolutely incredible . these doctrine seem unproven , abstract . and to my astonishment , when I begin seriously study other tradition , I begin to realize that belief — which we make such a fuss about today — be only a very recent religious enthusiasm that surface only in the west , in about the 17th century . the word " belief " itself originally mean to love , to prize , to hold dear . in the 17th century , it narrow its focus , for reason that I be explore in a book I be write at the moment , to include — to mean an intellectual assent to a set of proposition , a credo . " I believe : " it do not mean , " I accept certain creedal article of faith . " it mean : " I commit myself . I engage myself . " indeed , some of the world tradition think very little of religious orthodoxy . in the quran , religious opinion — religious orthodoxy — be dismiss as " zanna : " self - indulgent guesswork about matter that nobody can be certain of one way or the other , but which make people quarrelsome and stupidly sectarian . ( laughter )     so if religion be not about believe thing , what be it about ? what I 've find , across the board , be that religion be about behave differently . instead of decide whether or not you believe in god , first you do something . you behave in a committed way , and then you begin to understand the truth of religion . and religious doctrine be mean to be summon to action ; you only understand they when you put they into practice .     now , pride of place in this practice be give to compassion . and it be an arrest fact that right across the board , in every single one of the major world faith , compassion — the ability to feel with the other in the way we 've be think about this evening — be not only the test of any true religiosity , it be also what will bring we into the presence of what jews , christians and muslims call " god " or the " divine . " it be compassion , say the buddha , which bring you to nirvana . why ? because in compassion , when we feel with the other , we dethrone ourselves from the center of our world and we put another person there . and once we get rid of ego , then we be ready to see the divine .     and in particular , every single one of the major world tradition have highlight — have say — and put at the core of their tradition what be become know as the golden rule . first propound by confucius five century before christ : " do not do to other what you would not like they to do to you . " that , he say , be the central thread which run through all his teaching and that his disciple should put into practice all day and every day . and it be — the golden rule would bring they to the transcendent value that he call " ren , " human - heartedness , which be a transcendent experience in itself .     and this be absolutely crucial to the monotheism , too . there be a famous story about the great rabbi , hillel , the old contemporary of jesus . a pagan come to he and offer to convert to judaism if the rabbi could recite the whole of jewish teaching while he stand on one leg . hillel stand on one leg and say , " that which be hateful to you , do not do to your neighbor . that be the torah . the rest be commentary . go and study it . " ( laughter )     and " go and study it " be what he mean . he say , " in your exegesis , you must make it clear that every single verse of the torah be a commentary , a gloss upon the golden rule . " the great rabbi meir say that any interpretation of scripture which lead to hatred and disdain , or contempt of other people — any people whatsoever — be illegitimate .     saint augustine make exactly the same point . scripture , he say , " teach nothing but charity , and we must not leave an interpretation of scripture until we have find a compassionate interpretation of it . " and this struggle to find compassion in some of these rather rebarbative text be a good dress rehearsal for do the same in ordinary life . ( applause )     but now look at our world . and we be live in a world that be — where religion have be hijack . where terrorist cite quranic verse to justify their atrocity . where instead of take jesus ' word , " love your enemy . do not judge other , " we have the spectacle of christian endlessly judge other people , endlessly use scripture as a way of argue with other people , put other people down . throughout the age , religion have be use to oppress other , and this be because of human ego , human greed . we have a talent as a species for mess up wonderful thing .     so the tradition also insist — and this be an important point , I think — that you could not and must not confine your compassion to your own group : your own nation , your own co - religionist , your own fellow countryman . you must have what one of the chinese sage call " jian ai " : concern for everybody . love your enemy . honor the stranger . we form you , say the quran , into tribe and nation so that you may know one another .     and this , again — this universal outreach — be getting subdue in the strident use of religion — abuse of religion — for nefarious gain . now , I 've lose count of the number of taxi driver who , when I say to they what I do for a living , inform I that religion have be the cause of all the major world war in history . wrong . the cause of our present woe be political .     but , make no mistake about it , religion be a kind of fault line , and when a conflict gets ingrain in a region , religion can get suck in and become part of the problem . our modernity have be exceedingly violent . between 1914 and 1945 , 70 million people die in europe alone as a result of armed conflict . and so many of our institution , even football , which use to be a pleasant pastime , now cause riot where people even die . and it be not surprising that religion , too , have be affect by this violent ethos .     there be also a great deal , I think , of religious illiteracy around . people seem to think , now equate religious faith with believe thing . as though that — we call religious people often believer , as though that be the main thing that they do . and very often , secondary goal get push into the first place , in place of compassion and the golden rule . because the golden rule be difficult . I sometimes — when I be speak to congregation about compassion , I sometimes see a mutinous expression cross some of their face because a lot of religious people prefer to be right , rather than compassionate . ( laughter )     now — but that be not the whole story . since september the 11th , when my work on islam suddenly propel I into public life , in a way that I would never imagine , I 've be able to sort of go all over the world , and find , everywhere I go , a yearning for change . I 've just come back from pakistan , where literally thousand of people come to my lecture , because they be yearn , first of all , to hear a friendly western voice . and especially the young people be come . and be ask I — the young people be say , " what can we do ? what can we do to change thing ? " and my host in pakistan say , " look , do not be too polite to we . tell we where we be go wrong . let us talk together about where religion be fail . "     because it seem to I that with — our current situation be so serious at the moment that any ideology that do not promote a sense of global understanding and global appreciation of each other be fail the test of the time . and religion , with its wide follow ... here in the united states , people may be be religious in a different way , as a report have just show — but they still want to be religious . it be only western europe that have retain its secularism , which be now begin to look rather endearingly old - fashioned .     but people want to be religious , and religion should be make to be a force for harmony in the world , which it can and should be — because of the golden rule . " do not do to other what you would not have they do to you " : an ethos that should now be apply globally . we should not treat other nation as we would not wish to be treat ourselves .     and these — whatever our wretched belief — be a religious matter , it be a spiritual matter . it be a profound moral matter that engage and should engage we all . and as I say , there be a hunger for change out there . here in the united states , I think you see it in this election campaign : a longing for change . and people in church all over and mosque all over this continent after september the 11th , come together locally to create network of understanding . with the mosque , with the synagogue , say , " we must start to speak to one another . " I think it be time that we move beyond the idea of toleration and move toward appreciation of the other .     I would — there be one story I would just like to mention . this come from " the iliad . " but it tell you what this spirituality should be . you know the story of " the iliad , " the 10 - year war between greece and troy . in one incident , achille , the famous warrior of greece , take his troop out of the war , and the whole war effort suffer . and in the course of the ensue muddle , his beloved friend , patroclus , be kill — and kill in single combat by one of the trojan prince , hector . and achille go mad with grief and rage and revenge , and he mutilate the body . he kill hector , he mutilate his body and then he refuse to give the body back for burial to the family , which mean that , in greek ethos , hector 's soul will wander eternally , lose . and then one night , priam , king of troy , an old man , come into the greek camp incognito , make his way to achille ' tent to ask for the body of his son . and everybody be shock when the old man take off his head cover and show himself . and achille look at he and think of his father . and he start to weep . and priam look at the man who have murder so many of his son , and he , too , start to weep . and the sound of their weeping fill the house . the greeks believe that weep together create a bond between people . and then achille take the body of hector , he hand it very tenderly to the father , and the two man look at each other , and see each other as divine .     that be the ethos find , too , in all the religion . it be what be mean by overcome the horror that we feel when we be under threat of our enemy , and begin to appreciate the other . it be of great importance that the word for " holy " in hebrew , apply to god , be " kadosh " : separate , other . and it be often , perhaps , the very otherness of our enemy which can give we intimation of that utterly mysterious transcendence which be god .     and now , here be my wish : I wish that you would help with the creation , launch and propagation of a charter for compassion , craft by a group of inspirational thinker from the three abrahamic tradition of judaism , christianity and islam , and base on the fundamental principle of the golden rule . we need to create a movement among all these people that I meet in my travel — you probably meet , too — who want to join up , in some way , and reclaim their faith , which they feel , as I say , have be hijack . we need to empower people to remember the compassionate ethos , and to give guideline . this charter would not be a massive document . I would like to see it — to give guideline as to how to interpret the scripture , these text that be be abuse . remember what the rabbis and what augustine say about how scripture should be govern by the principle of charity . let us get back to that . and the idea , too , of jews , christians and muslims — these tradition now so often at loggerhead — work together to create a document which we hope will be sign by a thousand , at least , of major religious leader from all the tradition of the world .     and you be the people . I be just a solitary scholar . despite the idea that I love a good time , which I be rather amazed to see come up on I — I actually spend a great deal of time alone , study , and I be not very — you be the people with medium knowledge to explain to I how we can get this to everybody , everybody on the planet . I 've have some preliminary talk , and archbishop desmond tutu , for example , be very happy to give his name to this , as be imam feisal rauf , the imam in new york city . also , I would be work with the alliance of civilization at the united nations . I be part of that united nations initiative call the alliance of civilization , which be ask by kofi annan to diagnose the cause of extremism , and to give practical guideline to member state about how to avoid the escalation of further extremism .     and the alliance have tell I that they be very happy to work with it . the importance of this be that this be — I can see some of you start to look worried , because you think it be a slow and cumbersome body — but what the united nations can do be give we some neutrality , so that this be not see as a western or a christian initiative , but that it be come , as it be , from the united nations , from the world — who would help with the sort of bureaucracy of this .     and so I do urge you to join I in make — in this charter — to build this charter , launch it and propagate it so that it become — I would like to see it in every college , every church , every mosque , every synagogue in the world , so that people can look at their tradition , reclaim it , and make religion a source of peace in the world , which it can and should be . thank you very much . ( applause )  
   the value of nothing : out of nothing come something . that be an essay I write when I be 11 year old and I get a b+ . ( laughter ) what I be go to talk about : nothing out of something , and how we create . and I be going to try and do that within the 18 - minute time span that we be tell to stay within , and to follow the ted commandment : that be , actually , something that create a near - death experience , but near - death be good for creativity . ( laughter ) ok .     so , I also want to explain , because dave eggers say he be go to heckle I if I say anything that be a lie , or not true to universal creativity . and I 've do it this way for half the audience , who be scientific . when I say we , I do not mean you , necessarily ; I mean I , and my right brain , my left brain and the one that be in between that be the censor and tell I what I be say be wrong . and I be go do that also by look at what I think be part of my creative process , which include a number of thing that happen , actually — the nothing start even early than the moment in which I be create something new . and that include nature , and nurture , and what I refer to as nightmare .     now in the nature area , we look at whether or not we be innately equip with something , perhaps in our brain , some abnormal chromosome that cause this muse - like effect . and some people would say that we be bear with it in some other mean . and other , like my mother , would say that I get my material from past life . some people would also say that creativity may be a function of some other neurological quirk — van gogh syndrome — that you have a little bit of , you know , psychosis , or depression . I do have to say , somebody — I read recently that van gogh be not really necessarily psychotic , that he might have have temporal lobe seizure , and that might have cause his spurt of creativity , and I do not — I suppose it do something in some part of your brain . and I will mention that I actually develop temporal lobe seizure a number of year ago , but it be during the time I be write my last book , and some people say that book be quite different .     I think that part of it also begin with a sense of identity crisis : you know , who be I , why be I this particular person , why be I not black like everybody else ? and sometimes you be equip with skill , but they may not be the kind of skill that enable creativity . I use to draw . I think I would be an artist . and I have a miniature poodle . and it be not bad , but it be not really creative . because all I could really do be represent in a very one - on - one way . and I have a sense that I probably copy this from a book . and then , I also be not really shine in a certain area that I want to be , and you know , you look at those score , and it be not bad , but it be not certainly predictive that I would one day make my living out of the artful arrangement of word .     also , one of the principle of creativity be to have a little childhood trauma . and I have the usual kind that I think a lot of people have , and that be that , you know , I have expectation place on I . that figure right there , by the way , figure right there be a toy give to I when I be but nine year old , and it be to help I become a doctor from a very early age . I have some one that be long last : from the age of five to 15 , this be suppose to be my side occupation , and it lead to a sense of failure .     but actually , there be something quite real in my life that happen when I be about 14 . and it be discover that my brother , in 1967 , and then my father , six month later , have brain tumor . and my mother believe that something have go wrong , and she be going to find out what it be , and she be going to fix it . my father be a baptist minister , and he believe in miracle , and that god 's will would take care of that . but , of course , they end up die , six month apart . and after that , my mother believe that it be fate , or curse — she go look through all the reason in the universe why this would have happen . everything except randomness . she do not believe in randomness . there be a reason for everything . and one of the reason , she think , be that her mother , who have die when she be very young , be angry at she . and so , I have this notion of death all around I , because my mother also believe that I would be next , and she would be next . and when you be face with the prospect of death very soon , you begin to think very much about everything . you become very creative , in a survival sense .     and this , then , lead to my big question . and they be the same one that I have today . and they be : why do thing happen , and how do thing happen ? and the one my mother ask : how do I make thing happen ? it be a wonderful way to look at these question , when you write a story . because , after all , in that framework , between page one and 300 , you have to answer this question of why thing happen , how thing happen , in what order they happen . what be the influence ? how do I , as the narrator , as the writer , also influence that ? and it be also one that , I think , many of our scientist have be ask . it be a kind of cosmology , and I have to develop a cosmology of my own universe , as the creator of that universe .     and you see , there be a lot of back and forth in try to make that happen , try to figure it out — year and year , oftentime . so , when I look at creativity , I also think that it be this sense or this inability to repress , my look at association in practically anything in life . and I get a lot of they during what be be go on throughout this conference , almost everything that be be go on .     and so I be go to use , as the metaphor , this association : quantum mechanic , which I really do not understand , but I be still going to use it as the process for explain how it be the metaphor . so , in quantum mechanic , of course , you have dark energy and dark matter . and it be the same thing in look at these question of how thing happen . there be a lot of unknown , and you often do not know what it be except by its absence . but when you make those association , you want they to come together in a kind of synergy in the story , and what you be find be what matter . the meaning . and that be what I look for in my work , a personal meaning .     there be also the uncertainty principle , which be part of quantum mechanic , as I understand it . ( laughter ) and this happen constantly in the writing . and there be the terrible and dread observer effect , in which you be look for something , and you know , thing be happen simultaneously , and you be look at it in a different way , and you be try to really look for the about - ness , or what be this story about . and if you try too hard , then you will only write the about . you will not discover anything . and what you be suppose to find , what you hope to find in some serendipitous way , be no long there . now , I do not want to ignore the other side of what happen in our universe , like many of our scientist have . and so , I be go to just throw in string theory here , and just say that creative people be multidimensional , and there be 11 level , I think , of anxiety . ( laughter ) and you all operate at the same time .     there be also a big question of ambiguity . and I would link that to something call the cosmological constant . and you do not know what be operate , but something be operate there . and ambiguity , to I , be very uncomfortable in my life , and I have it . moral ambiguity . it be constantly there . and , just as an example , this be one that recently come to I . it be something I read in an editorial by a woman who be talk about the war in iraq . and she say , " save a man from drown , you be responsible to he for life . " a very famous chinese saying , she say . and that mean because we go into iraq , we should stay there until thing be solve . you know , maybe even 100 year . so , there be another one that I come across , and it be " save fish from drown . " and it be what buddhist fisherman say , because they be not suppose to kill anything . and they also have to make a living , and people need to be feed . so their way of rationalize that is they be save the fish from drown , and unfortunately , in the process the fish die .     now , what be encapsulate in both these drown metaphor — actually , one of they be my mother 's interpretation , and it be a famous chinese saying , because she say it to I : " save a man from drown , you be responsible to he for life . " and it be a warning — do not get involve in other people 's business , or you be go to get stick . ok . I think if somebody really be drown , she would save they . but , both of these saying — save a fish from drown , or save a man from drown — to I they have to do with intention .     and all of we in life , when we see a situation , we have a response . and then we have intention . there be an ambiguity of what that should be that we should do , and then we do something . and the result of that may not match what our intention have be . maybe thing go wrong . and so , after that , what be our responsibility ? what be we suppose to do ? do we stay in for life , or do we do something else and justify and say , well , my intention be good , and therefore I can not be hold responsible for all of it ? that be the ambiguity in my life that really disturb I , and lead I to write a book call " save fish from drown . "     I see example of that . once I identify this question , it be all over the place . I get these hint everywhere . and then , in a way , I know that they have always be there . and then write , that be what happen . I get these hint , these clue , and I realize that they 've be obvious , and yet they have not be . and what I need , in effect , be a focus . and when I have the question , it be a focus . and all these thing that seem to be flotsam and jetsam in life actually go through that question , and what happen be those particular thing become relevant . and it seem like it be happen all the time . you think there be a sort of coincidence go on , a serendipity , in which you be get all this help from the universe . and it may also be explain that now you have a focus . and you be notice it more often .     but you apply this . you begin to look at thing have to do with your tension . your brother , who be fall in trouble , do you take care of he ? why or why not ? it may be something that be perhaps more serious — as I say , human right in burma . I be think that I should not go because somebody say , if I do , it would show that I approve of the military regime there . and then , after a while , I have to ask myself , " why do we take on knowledge , why do we take on assumption that other people have give we ? " and it be the same thing that I feel when I be grow up , and be hear these rule of moral conduct from my father , who be a baptist minister . so I decide that I would go to burma for my own intention , and still do not know that if I go there , what the result of that would be , if I write a book — and I just would have to face that later , when the time come .     we be all concerned with thing that we see in the world that we be aware of . we come to this point and say , what do I as an individual do ? not all of we can go to africa , or work at hospital , so what do we do , if we have this moral response , this feeling ? also , I think one of the big thing we be all look at , and we talk about today , be genocide . this lead to this question . when I look at all these thing that be morally ambiguous and uncomfortable , and I consider what my intention should be , I realize it go back to this identity question that I have when I be a child — and why be I here , and what be the meaning of my life , and what be my place in the universe ?     it seem so obvious , and yet it be not . we all hate moral ambiguity in some sense , and yet it be also absolutely necessary . in write a story , it be the place where I begin . sometimes I get help from the universe , it seem . my mother would say it be the ghost of my grandmother from the very first book , because it seem I know thing I be not suppose to know . instead of write that the grandmother die accidentally , from an overdose of opium , while have too much of a good time , I actually put down in the story that the woman kill herself , and that actually be the way it happen . and my mother decide that that information must have come from my grandmother .     there be also thing , quite uncanny , which bring I information that will help I in the writing of the book . in this case , I be write a story that include some kind of detail , period of history , a certain location . and I need to find something historically that would match that . and I take down this book , and I — first page that I flip it to be exactly the setting , and the time period , and the kind of character I need — be the taiping rebellion , happen in the area near guilin , outside of that , and a character who think he be the son of god .     you wonder , be these thing random chance ? well , what be random ? what be chance ? what be luck ? what be thing that you get from the universe that you can not really explain ? and that go into the story , too . these be the thing I constantly think about from day to day . especially when good thing happen , and , in particular , when bad thing happen . but I do think there be a kind of serendipity , and I do want to know what those element be , so I can thank they , and also try to find they in my life . because , again , I think that when I be aware of they , more of they happen .     another chance encounter be when I go to a place — I just be with some friend , and we drive randomly to a different place , and we end up in this non - tourist location , a beautiful village , pristine . and we walk three valley beyond , and the third valley , there be something quite mysterious and ominous , a discomfort I feel . and then I know that have to be [ the ] setting of my book . and in write one of the scene , it happen in that third valley . for some reason I write about cairn — stack of rock — that a man be build . and I do not know exactly why I have it , but it be so vivid . I get stick , and a friend , when she ask if I would go for a walk with her dog , that I say , sure . and about 45 minute later , walk along the beach , I come across this . and it be a man , a chinese man , and he be stack these thing , not with glue , not with anything . and I ask he , " how be it possible to do this ? " and he say , " well , I guess with everything in life , there be a place of balance . " and this be exactly the meaning of my story at that point . I have so many example — I have so many instance like this , when I be write a story , and I can not explain it . be it because I have the filter that I have such a strong coincidence in write about these thing ? or be it a kind of serendipity that we can not explain , like the cosmological constant ?     a big thing that I also think about be accident . and as I say , my mother do not believe in randomness . what be the nature of accident ? and how be we go to assign what the responsibility and the cause be , outside of a court of law ? I be able to see that in a firsthand way , when I go to beautiful dong village , in guizhou , the poor province of china . and I see this beautiful place . I know I want to come back . and I have a chance to do that , when national geographic ask I if I want to write anything about china . and I say yes , about this village of singe people , singe minority . and they agree , and between the time I see this place and the next time I go , there be a terrible accident . a man , an old man , fall asleep , and his quilt drop in a pan of fire that keep he warm . 60 home be destroy , and 40 be damage . responsibility be assign to the family . the man 's son be banish to live three kilometer away , in a cowshed . and , of course , as westerner , we say , " well , it be an accident . that be not fair . it be the son , not the father . "     when I go on a story , I have to let go of those kind of belief . it take a while , but I have to let go of they and just go there , and be there . and so I be there on three occasion , different season . and I begin to sense something different about the history , and what have happen before , and the nature of life in a very poor village , and what you find as your joy , and your ritual , your tradition , your link with other family . and I see how this have a kind of justice , in its responsibility . I be able to find out also about the ceremony that they be use , a ceremony they have not use in about 29 year . and it be to send some man — a feng shui master send man down to the underworld on ghost horse . now you , as westerner , and I , as westerner , would say well , that be superstition . but after be there for a while , and see the amazing thing that happen , you begin to wonder whose belief be those that be in operation in the world , determine how thing happen .     so I remain with they , and the more I write that story , the more I get into those belief , and I think that be important for I — to take on the belief , because that be where the story be real , and that be where I be going to find the answer to how I feel about certain question that I have in life . year go by , of course , and the writing , it do not happen instantly , as I be try to convey it to you here at ted . the book come and it go . when it arrive , it be no long my book . it be in the hand of reader , and they interpret it differently . but I go back to this question of , how do I create something out of nothing ? and how do I create my own life ?     and I think it be by questioning , and say to myself that there be no absolute truth . I believe in specific , the specific of story , and the past , the specific of that past , and what be happen in the story at that point . I also believe that in think about thing — my thinking about luck , and fate , and coincidence and accident , god 's will , and the synchrony of mysterious force — I will come to some notion of what that be , how we create . I have to think of my role . where I be in the universe , and do somebody intend for I to be that way , or be it just something I come up with ? and I also can find that by imagine fully , and become what be imagine — and yet be in that real world , the fictional world . and that be how I find particle of truth , not the absolute truth , or the whole truth . and they have to be in all possibility , include those I never consider before .     so , there be never complete answer . or rather , if there be an answer , it be to remind myself that there be uncertainty in everything , and that be good , because then I will discover something new . and if there be a partial answer , a more complete answer from I , it be to simply imagine . and to imagine be to put myself in that story , until there be only — there be a transparency between I and the story that I be create .     and that be how I 've discover that if I feel what be in the story — in one story — then I come the close , I think , to know what compassion be , to feel that compassion . because for everything , in that question of how thing happen , it have to do with the feeling . I have to become the story in order to understand a lot of that . we 've come to the end of the talk , and I will reveal what be in the bag , and it be the muse , and it be the thing that transform in our life , that be wonderful and stay with we . there she be . thank you very much ! ( applause )  
   how do the news shape the way we see the world ? here be the world base on the way it look — base on landmass . and here be how news shape what americans see . this map — ( applause ) — this map show the number of second that american network and cable news organization dedicate to news story , by country , in february of 2007 — just one year ago . now , this be a month when north korea agree to dismantle its nuclear facility . there be massive flooding in indonesia . and in paris , the ipcc release its study confirm man 's impact on global warming . the u.s . account for 79 percent of total news coverage . and when we take out the u.s . and look at the remain 21 percent , we see a lot of iraq — that be that big green thing there — and little else . the combined coverage of russia , china and india , for example , reach just one percent .     when we you all the news story and remove just one story , here be how the world look . what be that story ? the death of anna nicole smith . this story eclipse every country except iraq , and receive 10 time the coverage of the ipcc report . and the cycle continue ; as we all know , britney have loom pretty large lately .     so , why do not we hear more about the world ? one reason be that news network have reduce the number of their foreign bureaus by half . aside from one - person abc mini - bureaus in nairobi , new delhi and mumbai , there be no network news bureaus in all of africa , india or south america — place that be home to more than two billion people .     the reality be that cover britney be cheap . and this lack of global coverage be all the more disturbing when we see where people go for news . local tv news loom large , and unfortunately only dedicate 12 percent of its coverage to international news .     and what about the web ? the most popular news site do not do much well . last year , pew and the colombia j - school analyze the 14,000 story that appear on google news ' front page . and they , in fact , cover the same 24 news event . similarly , a study in e - content show that much of global news from u.s . news creator be recycle story from the ap wire service and reuter , and do not put thing into a context that people can understand their connection to it .     so , if you put it all together , this could help explain why today 's college graduate , as well as less educate american , know less about the world than their counterpart do 20 year ago . and if you think it be simply because we be not interested , you would be wrong . in recent year , americans who say they closely follow global news most of the time grow to over 50 percent .     the real question : be this distort worldview what we want for americans in our increasingly interconnected world ? I know we can do well . and can we afford not to ? thank you .  
   cultural evolution be a dangerous child for any specie to let loose on its planet . by the time you realize what be happen , the child be a toddler , up and cause havoc , and it be too late to put it back . we human be earth 's pandoran specie . we be the one who let the second replicator out of its box , and we can not push it back in . we be see the consequence all around we .     now that , I suggest , be the view that come out of take memetic seriously . and it give we a new way of thinking about not only what be go on on our planet , but what might be go on elsewhere in the cosmo . so first of all , I would like to say something about memetic and the theory of meme , and secondly , how this might answer question about who be out there , if indeed anyone be .     so , memetic : memetic be found on the principle of universal darwinism . darwin have this amazing idea . indeed , some people say it be the good idea anybody ever have . be not that a wonderful thought , that there could be such a thing as a good idea anybody ever have ? do you think there could ? audience : no . ( laughter ) susan blackmore : someone say no , very loudly , from over there . well , I say yes , and if there be , I give the prize to darwin .     why ? because the idea be so simple , and yet it explain all design in the universe . I would say not just biological design , but all of the design that we think of as human design . it be all just the same thing happen . what do darwin say ? I know you know the idea , natural selection , but let I just paraphrase " the origin of specie , " 1859 , in a few sentence .     what darwin say be something like this : if you have creature that vary , and that can not be doubt — I 've be to the galapagos , and I 've measure the size of the beak and the size of the turtle shell and so on , and so on . and 100 page later . ( laughter ) and if there be a struggle for life , such that you all of these creature die — and this can not be doubt , I 've read malthus and I 've calculate how long it would take for elephant to cover the whole world if they breed unrestricted , and so on and so on . and another 100 page later . and if the very few that survive pass onto their offspring whatever it be that help they survive , then those offspring must be well adapt to the circumstance in which all this happen than their parent be .     you see the idea ? if , if , if , then . he have no concept of the idea of an algorithm , but that be what he describe in that book , and this be what we now know as the evolutionary algorithm . the principle be you just need those three thing — variation , selection and heredity . and as dan dennett put it , if you have those , then you must get evolution . or design out of chaos , without the aid of mind .     there be one word I love on that slide . what do you think my favorite word be ? audience : chaos . sb : chaos ? no . what ? mind ? no . audience : without . sb : no , not without . ( laughter ) you try they all in order : mmm ... ? audience : must . sb : must , at must . must , must . this be what make it so amazing . you do not need a designer , or a plan , or foresight , or anything else . if there be something that be copy with variation and it be select , then you must get design appear out of nowhere . you can not stop it . must be my favorite word there .     now , what be this to do with meme ? well , the principle here apply to anything that be copy with variation and selection . we be so used to think in term of biology , we think about gene this way . darwin do not , of course ; he do not know about gene . he talk mostly about animal and plant , but also about language evolve and become extinct . but the principle of universal darwinism be that any information that be varied and select will produce design .     and this be what richard dawkin be on about in his 1976 bestseller , " the selfish gene . " the information that be copy , he call the replicator . it selfishly copy . not mean it kind of sit around inside cell go , " I want to get copy . " but that it will get copy if it can , regardless of the consequence . it do not care about the consequence because it can not , because it be just information be copy . and he want to get away from everybody think all the time about gene , and so he say , " be there another replicator out there on the planet ? " ah , yes , there be .     look around you — here will do , in this room . all around we , still clumsily drift about in its primeval soup of culture , be another replicator . information that we copy from person to person , by imitation , by language , by talk , by tell story , by wear clothe , by do thing . this be information copy with variation and selection . this be design process go on . he want a name for the new replicator . so , he take the greek word " mimeme , " which mean that which be imitate . remember that , that be the core definition : that which be imitate . and abbreviate it to meme , just because it sound good and make a good meme , an effective spread meme . so that be how the idea come about . it be important to stick with that definition .     the whole science of memetic be much malign , much misunderstood , much fear . but a lot of these problem can be avoid by remember the definition . a meme be not equivalent to an idea . it be not an idea . it be not equivalent to anything else , really . stick with the definition . it be that which be imitate , or information which be copy from person to person . so , let us see some meme .     well , you sir , you 've get those glass hang around your neck in that particularly fetch way . I wonder whether you invent that idea for yourself , or copy it from someone else ? if you copy it from someone else , it be a meme . and what about , oh , I can not see any interesting meme here . all right everyone , who be get some interesting meme for I ? oh , well , your earring , I do not suppose you invent the idea of earring . you probably go out and buy they . there be plenty more in the shop . that be something that be pass on from person to person . all the story that we be tell — well , of course , ted be a great meme - f , masse of meme .     the way to think about meme , though , be to think , why do they spread ? they be selfish information , they will get copy , if they can . but some of they will be copy because they be good , or true , or useful , or beautiful . some of they will be copy even though they be not . some , it be quite hard to tell why .     there be one particular curious meme which I rather enjoy . and I be glad to say , as I expect , I find it when I come here , and I be sure all of you find it , too . you go to your nice , posh , international hotel somewhere , and you come in and you put down your clothe and you go to the bathroom , and what do you see ? audience : bathroom soap . sb : pardon ? audience : soap . sb : soap , yeah . what else do you see ? audience : ( inaudible ) sb : mmm mmm . audience : sink , toilet ! sb : sink , toilet , yes , these be all meme , they be all meme , but they be sort of useful one , and then there be this one . ( laughter ) what be this one do ? ( laughter ) this have spread all over the world . it be not surprising that you all find it when you arrive in your bathroom here . but I take this photograph in a toilet at the back of a tent in the eco - camp in the jungle in assam . ( laughter ) who fold that thing up there , and why ? ( laughter ) some people get carry away . ( laughter ) other people be just lazy and make mistake . some hotel exploit the opportunity to put even more meme with a little sticker . ( laughter ) what be this all about ? I suppose it be there to tell you that somebody be clean the place , and it be all lovely . and you know , actually , all it tell you be that another person have potentially spread germ from place to place . ( laughter )     so , think of it this way . imagine a world full of brain and far more meme than can possibly find home . the meme be all try to get copy — try , in inverted comma — i.e. , that be the shorthand for , if they can get copy , they will . they be use you and I as their propagating , copying machinery , and we be the meme machine .     now , why be this important ? why be this useful , or what do it tell we ? it give we a completely new view of human origin and what it mean to be human , all conventional theory of cultural evolution , of the origin of human , and what make we so different from other specie . all other theory explain the big brain , and language , and tool use and all these thing that make we unique , be base upon gene . language must have be useful for the gene . tool use must have enhance our survival , mating and so on . it always come back , as richard dawkin complain all that long time ago , it always come back to gene .     the point of memetic be to say , " oh no , it do not . " there be two replicator now on this planet . from the moment that our ancestor , perhaps two and a half million year ago or so , begin imitate , there be a new copying process . copy with variation and selection . a new replicator be let loose , and it could never be — right from the start — it could never be that human being who let loose this new creature , could just copy the useful , beautiful , true thing , and not copy the other thing . while their brain be have an advantage from be able to copy — light fire , keep fire go , new technique of hunting , these kind of thing — inevitably they be also copy put feather in their hair , or wear strange clothe , or paint their face , or whatever .     so , you get an arm race between the gene which be try to get the human to have small economical brain and not waste their time you all this stuff , and the meme themselves , like the sound that people make and copy — in other word , what turn out to be language — compete to get the brain to get big and big . so , the big brain , on this theory , be drive by the meme .     this be why , in " the meme machine , " I call it memetic drive . as the meme evolve , as they inevitably must , they drive a big brain that be well at copy the meme that be do the driving . this be why we 've end up with such peculiar brain , that we like religion , and music , and art . language be a parasite that we 've adapt to , not something that be there originally for our gene , on this view . and like most parasite , it can begin dangerous , but then it coevolve and adapt , and we end up with a symbiotic relationship with this new parasite .     and so , from our perspective , we do not realize that that be how it begin . so , this be a view of what human be . all other specie on this planet be gene machine only , they do not imitate at all well , hardly at all . we alone be gene machine and meme machine as well . the meme take a gene machine and turn it into a meme machine .     but that be not all . we have a new kind of meme now . I 've be wonder for a long time , since I 've be think about meme a lot , be there a difference between the meme that we copy — the word we speak to each other , the gesture we copy , the human thing — and all these technological thing around we ? I have always , until now , call they all meme , but I do honestly think now we need a new word for technological meme .     let us call they techno - meme or teme . because the process be get different . we begin , perhaps 5,000 year ago , with writing . we put the storage of meme out there on a clay tablet , but in order to get true teme and true teme machine , you need to get the variation , the selection and the copying , all do outside of human . and we be get there . we be at this extraordinary point where we be nearly there , that there be machine like that . and indeed , in the short time I 've already be at ted , I see we be even close than I think we be before .     so actually , now the teme be force our brain to become more like teme machine . our child be grow up very quickly learn to read , learn to use machinery . we be go to have all kind of implant , drug that force we to stay awake all the time . we 'll think we be choose these thing , but the teme be make we do it . so , we be at this cusp now of have a third replicator on our planet . now , what about what else be go on out there in the universe ? be there anyone else out there ? people have be ask this question for a long time . we 've be ask it here at ted already . in 1961 , frank drake make his famous equation , but I think he concentrate on the wrong thing . it be be very productive , that equation . he want to estimate n , the number of communicative civilization out there in our galaxy , and he include in there the rate of star formation , the rate of planet , but crucially , intelligence .     I think that be the wrong way to think about it . intelligence appear all over the place , in all kind of guise . human intelligence be only one kind of a thing . but what be really important be the replicator you have and the level of replicator , one feeding on the one before . so , I would suggest that we do not think intelligence , we think replicators .     and on that basis , I 've suggest a different kind of equation . a very simple equation . n , the same thing , the number of communicative civilization out there [ that ] we might expect in our galaxy . just start with the number of planet there be in our galaxy . the fraction of those which get a first replicator . the fraction of those that get the second replicator . the fraction of those that get the third replicator . because it be only the third replicator that be go to reach out — send information , send probe , get out there , and communicate with anywhere else .     ok , so if we take that equation , why have not we hear from anybody out there ? because every step be dangerous . get a new replicator be dangerous . you can pull through , we have pull through , but it be dangerous . take the first step , as soon as life appear on this earth . we may take the gaian view . I love peter ward 's talk yesterday — it be not gaian all the time . actually , life form produce thing that kill themselves . well , we do pull through on this planet .     but then , a long time later , billion of year later , we get the second replicator , the meme . that be dangerous , all right . think of the big brain . how many mother do we have here ? you know all about big brain . they be dangerous to give birth to , be agonize to give birth to . ( laughter ) my cat give birth to four kitten , purr all the time . ah , mm — slightly different . ( laughter )     but not only be it painful , it kill lot of baby , it kill lot of mother , and it be very expensive to produce . the gene be force into produce all this myelin , all the fat to myelinate the brain . do you know , sit here , your brain be use about 20 percent of your body 's energy output for two percent of your body weight ? it be a really expensive organ to run . why ? because it be produce the meme .     now , it could have kill we off . it could have kill we off , and maybe it nearly do , but you see , we do not know . but maybe it nearly do . have it be try before ? what about all those other specie ? louise leakey talk yesterday about how we be the only one in this branch leave . what happen to the other ? could it be that this experiment in imitation , this experiment in a second replicator , be dangerous enough to kill people off ?     well , we do pull through , and we adapt . but now , we be hit , as I 've just describe , we be hit the third replicator point . and this be even more dangerous — well , it be dangerous again . why ? because the teme be selfish replicator and they do not care about we , or our planet , or anything else . they be just information , why would they ? they be use we to suck up the planet 's resource to produce more computer , and more of all these amazing thing we be hear about here at ted . do not think , " oh , we create the internet for our own benefit . " that be how it seem to we . think , teme spread because they must . we be the old machine .     now , be we go to pull through ? what be go to happen ? what do it mean to pull through ? well , there be kind of two way of pull through . one that be obviously happen all around we now , be that the teme turn we into teme machine , with these implant , with the drug , with we merge with the technology . and why would they do that ? because we be self - replicating . we have baby . we make new one , and so it be convenient to piggyback on we , because we be not yet at the stage on this planet where the other option be viable . although it be close , I hear this morning , it be close than I think it be . where the teme machine themselves will replicate themselves . that way , it would not matter if the planet 's climate be utterly destabilize , and it be no long possible for human to live here . because those teme machine , they would not need — they be not squishy , wet , oxygen - breathing , warmth - require creature . they could carry on without we .     so , those be the two possibility . the second , I do not think we be that close . it be come , but we be not there yet . the first , it be come too . but the damage that be already be do to the planet be show we how dangerous the third point be , that third danger point , get a third replicator . and will we get through this third danger point , like we get through the second and like we get through the first ? maybe we will , maybe we will not . I have no idea . ( applause ) chris anderson : that be an incredible talk . sb : thank you . I scare myself . can : ( laughter )  
   but anyway , this be about the evil of science , so I think it ’ perfect .     ♫ my oh my , walk by , who ’ the apple of my eye ? ♫     ♫ why , it be my very own clonie . ♫     ♫ oh , if I should stroll the hood , who know I could look so good ♫     ♫ just talk on the phone to clonie . ♫     ♫ we be pal , it be cool , 'cause we be not lonely , ♫     ♫ shallow gene pool be nothing to my only clonie . ♫     ♫ I and you , hustle through , hold on through thick and thin , ♫     ♫ just day by day , our dna , so the olson twin get nothing on we . ♫     ♫ we 'll survive , side by side . mother nature , do not you call her phony , she ’ my clonie . ♫     ♫ be wealthy , but not healthy , have no one to dwell with I , ♫     ♫ so look who I got bear — clonie . ♫     ♫ far from broke , bored , rich folk , we do not need no natural yolk — ♫     ♫ our baby come full - form , clonie . ♫     ♫ we 'll be huggable , get a publicist ♫     ♫ and show they , be the most lovable thing since fucking eminem . ♫     ♫ oh my friend , multiply , we ’re a franchise , like walt disney or hannibal lecter . ♫     ♫ we can tell our cancer cell be more benign than old phil spector . ♫     ♫ we ’ll survive side by side , should have sign with verve instead of sony . ♫     ♫ you ’re my clonie . ♫ " oh clonie , how I love you . "     " ha , I be the only person I ever love . "     ♫ gee , that be swell . I guess you be just my fatal attraction - ie . you ’re my clonie . ♫     thank you .     ( applause )  
   ♫ feminist do not have a sense of humor . ♫     ♫ feminist just want to be alone — boo hoo , hoo , hoo . ♫     ♫ feminist spread vicious lie and rumor . ♫     ♫ they have a tumor on their funny bone . ♫     ♫ they say child molestation be not funny — ha , ha , ha , ha . ♫     ♫ rape and degradation 's just a crime — lighten up , lady . ♫     ♫ rampant prostitution 's sex for money — what ’ wrong with that ? ♫     ♫ can not these chick do anything but whine ? ♫     ♫ dance break ! da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . ♫     ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . ♫     ♫ woo - hoo ! ♫     ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da — ♫     ♫ yeah , take it off . ♫     ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , dum . ♫     ♫ they say cheap objectification be not witty — it ’ hot ! ♫     ♫ equal work and wage worth the fight — ♫     ♫ sing we a new one . ♫     ♫ on - demand abortion every city — ok , but no gun control . ♫     ♫ will not these woman ever get a life ? ♫     ♫ feminist do not have a sense of humor — poor hillary . ♫     ♫ feminist and vegetarian — make mine a big mac . ♫     ♫ feminist spread vicious lie and rumor . ♫     ♫ they be far too sensitive to ever be a ham , ♫     ♫ that be why these feminist just need to find a man . ♫     ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . ♫     I ’m dennis kucinich and I approve this message . thank you . ( applause ) thank you . ( applause ) thank you .     I ask my mother , you know , should I say anything in support of anyone ? and she say , " oh no ! just dis everybody , except ralph nader . "     ( laughter )     ♫ I could show the world how to smile , ♫     ♫ I could be glad all of the while . ♫     ♫ I could turn the gray sky to blue , if I have you . ♫     ♫ I could leave the old day behind , ♫     ♫ leave all my pal , I ’d never mind . ♫     ♫ I could start my life all anew , if I have you . ♫     ♫ I could climb the snow - cap mountain , ♫     ♫ sail the mighty ocean wide . ♫     ♫ I could cross the burn desert , if I have you by my side . ♫     ♫ I could be a king , dear , uncrowned , humble or poor , rich or renowned . ♫     ♫ there be nothing I could not do , if I have you . ♫     thank you . well , thank you so much .  
   I and my colleague art aron and lucy brown and other , have put 37 people who be madly in love into a functional mri brain scanner . 17 who be happily in love , 15 who have just be dump , and we be just start our third experiment : study people who report that they be still in love after 10 to 25 year of marriage . so , this be the short story of that research .     in the jungle of guatemala , in tikal , stand a temple . it be build by the grand sun king , of the grandest city - state , of the grandest civilization of the america , the mayas . his name be jasaw chan k'awiil . he stand over six foot tall . he live into his 80 , and he be bury beneath this monument in 720 ad . and mayan inscription proclaim that he be deeply in love with his wife . so , he build a temple in her honor , face his . and every spring and autumn , exactly at the equinox , the sun rise behind his temple , and perfectly bathe her temple with his shadow . and as the sun set behind her temple in the afternoon , it perfectly bathe his temple with her shadow . after 1,300 year , these two lover still touch and kiss from their tomb .     around the world , people love . they sing for love , they dance for love , they compose poem and story about love . they tell myth and legend about love . they pine for love , they live for love , they kill for love , and they die for love . as walt whitman once say , " o I would stake all for you . " anthropologist have find evidence of romantic love in 170 society . they 've never find a society that do not have it .     but love be not always a happy experience . in one study of college student , they ask a lot of question about love , but the two that stand out to I the most be : " have you ever be reject by somebody who you really love ? " and the second question be : " have you ever dump somebody who really love you ? " and almost 95 percent of both man and woman say yes to both . almost nobody get out of love alive .     so , before I start tell you about the brain , I want to read for you what I think be the most powerful love poem on earth . there be other love poem that be , of course , just as good , but I do not think this one can be surpass . it be tell by an anonymous kwakiutl indian of southern alaska to a missionary in 1896 . and here it be . I 've never have the opportunity to say it before . " fire run through my body with the pain of love you . pain run through my body with the fire of my love for you . pain like a boil about to burst with my love for you , consume by fire with my love for you . I remember what you say to I . I be think of your love for I . I be tear by your love for I . pain and more pain — where be you go with my love ? I be tell you will go from here . I be tell you will leave I here . my body be numb with grief . remember what I say , my love . goodbye , my love , goodbye . " emily dickinson once write , " parting be all we need to know of hell . " how many people have suffer in all the million of year of human evolution ? how many people around the world be dance with elation at this very minute ? romantic love be one of the most powerful sensation on earth .     so , several year ago , I decide to look into the brain and study this madness . our first study of people who be happily in love have be widely publicize , so I be only go to say very little about it . we find activity in a tiny , little factory near the base of the brain call the ventral tegmental area . we find activity in some cell call the a10 cell , cell that actually make dopamine , a natural stimulant , and spray it to many brain region . indeed , this part , the vta , be part of the brain 's reward system . it be way below your cognitive thinking process . it be below your emotion . it be part of what we call the reptilian core of the brain , associate with wanting , with motivation , with focus and with craving . in fact , the same brain region where we find activity become active also when you feel the rush of cocaine .     but romantic love be much more than a cocaine high — at least you come down from cocaine . romantic love be an obsession , it possess you . you lose your sense of self . you can not stop think about another human being . somebody be camp in your head . as an eighth - century japanese poet say , " my longing have no time when it cease . " wild be love . and the obsession can get bad when you 've be reject .     so , right now , lucy brown and I , the neuroscientist on our project , be look at the datum of the people who be put into the machine after they have just be dump . it be very difficult actually , put these people in the machine , because they be in such bad shape .     ( laughter )     so anyway , we find activity in three brain region . we find activity in the brain region , in exactly the same brain region associate with intense romantic love . what a bad deal . you know , when you 've be dump , the one thing you love to do be just forget about this human being , and then go on with your life — but no , you just love they hard . as the poet terence , the roman poet once say , he say , " the less my hope , the hotter my love . " and indeed , we now know why . two thousand year later , we can explain this in the brain . that brain system — the reward system for wanting , for motivation , for craving , for focus — become more active when you can not get what you want . in this case , life 's great prize : an appropriate mating partner .     we find activity in other brain region also — in a brain region associate with calculate gain and loss . you be lie there , you be look at the picture , and you be in this machine , and you be calculate what go wrong . what have I lose ? as a matter of fact , lucy and I have a little joke about this . it come from a david mamet play , and there be two con artist in the play , and the woman be con the man , and the man look at the woman and say , " oh , you be a bad pony , I be not go to bet on you . " and indeed , it be this part of the brain , the core of the nucleus accumben , that be become active as you be measure your gain and loss . it be also the brain region that become active when you be willing to take enormous risk for huge gain and huge loss .     last but not least , we find activity in a brain region associate with deep attachment to another individual . no wonder people suffer around the world , and we have so many crime of passion . when you 've be reject in love , not only be you engulf with feeling of romantic love , but you be feel deep attachment to this individual . moreover , this brain circuit for reward be work , and you be feel intense energy , intense focus , intense motivation and the willingness to risk it all , to win life 's great prize .     so , what have I learn from this experiment that I would like to tell the world ? foremost , I have come to think that romantic love be a drive , a basic mating drive . not the sex drive — the sex drive get you look for a whole range of partner . romantic love enable you to focus your mating energy on just one at a time , conserve your mating energy , and start the mating process with this single individual . I think of all the poetry that I 've read about romantic love , what sum it up well be something that be say by plato over 2,000 year ago . he say , " the god of love live in a state of need . it be a need , it be an urge , it be a homeostatic imbalance . like hunger and thirst , it be almost impossible to stamp out . " I 've also come to believe that romantic love be an addiction : a perfectly wonderful addiction when it be go well , and a perfectly horrible addiction when it be go poorly .     and indeed , it have all of the characteristic of addiction . you focus on the person , you obsessively think about they , you crave they , you distort reality , your willingness to take enormous risk to win this person . and it be get the three main characteristic of addiction : tolerance , you need to see they more , and more , and more ; withdrawal ; and last : relapse . I 've get a girlfriend who be just get over a terrible love affair . it be be about eight month , she be begin to feel well . and she be drive along in her car the other day , and suddenly she hear a song on the car radio that remind she of this man . not only do the instant craving come back , but she have to pull over from the side of the road and cry . so , one thing I would like the medical community , and the legal community , and even the college community , to see if they can understand , that indeed , romantic love be one of the most addictive substance on earth .     I would also like to tell the world that animal love . there be not an animal on this planet that will copulate with anything that come along . too old , too young , too scruffy , too stupid , and they will not do it . unless you be stick in a laboratory cage — and you know , if you spend your entire life in a little box , you be not go to be as picky about who you have sex with , but I 've look in a hundred specie , and everywhere in the wild , animal have favorite . as a matter of fact , ethologist know this . there be over eight word for what they call " animal favoritism : " selective proceptivity , mate choice , female choice , sexual choice . and indeed , there be now three academic article in which they 've look at this attraction , which may only last for a second , but it be a definite attraction , and either this same brain region , this reward system , or the chemical of that reward system be involve . in fact , I think animal attraction can be instant — you can see an elephant instantly go for another elephant . and I think that this be really the origin of what you and I call " love at first sight . "     people have often ask I whether what I know about love have spoil it for I . and I just simply say , " hardly . " you can know every single ingredient in a piece of chocolate cake , and then when you sit down and eat that cake , you can still feel that joy . and certainly , I make all the same mistake that everybody else do too , but it be really deepen my understanding and compassion , really , for all human life . as a matter of fact , in new york , I often catch myself look in baby carriage and feel a little sorry for the tot . and in fact , sometimes I feel a little sorry for the chicken on my dinner plate , when I think of how intense this brain system be . our new experiment have be hatch by my colleague , art aron — put people who be report that they be still in love , in a long - term relationship , into the functional mri . we 've put five people in so far , and indeed , we find exactly the same thing . they be not lie . the brain area associate with intense romantic love still become active , 25 year later .     there be still many question to be answer and ask about romantic love . the question that I be work on right this minute — and I be only go to say it for a second , and then end — be , why do you fall in love with one person , rather than another ? I never would have even think to think of this , but match.com , the internet date site , come to I three year ago and ask I that question . and I say , I do not know . I know what happen in the brain , when you do become in love , but I do not know why you fall in love with one person rather than another . and so , I 've spend the last three year on this . and there be many reason that you fall in love with one person rather than another , that psychologist can tell you . and we tend to fall in love with somebody from the same socioeconomic background , the same general level of intelligence , of good look , the same religious value . your childhood certainly play a role , but nobody know how . and that be about it , that be all they know . no , they 've never find the way two personality fit together to make a good relationship .     so , it begin to occur to I that maybe your biology pull you towards some people rather than another . and I have concoct a questionnaire to see to what degree you express dopamine , serotonin , estrogen and testosterone . I think we 've evolve four very broad personality type associate with the ratio of these four chemical in the brain . and on this date site that I have create , call chemistry.com , I ask you first a series of question to see to what degree you express these chemical , and I be watch who choose who to love . and 3.7 million people have take the questionnaire in america . about 600,000 people have take it in 33 other country . I be put the datum together now , and at some point — there will always be magic to love , but I think I will come close to understanding why it be you can walk into a room and everybody be from your background , your same general level of intelligence , good look , and you do not feel pull towards all of they . I think there be biology to that . I think we be go to end up , in the next few year , to understand all kind of brain mechanism that pull we to one person rather than another .     so , I will close with this . these be my old people . faulkner say , " the past be not dead , it be not even past . " indeed , we carry a lot of luggage from our yesteryear in the human brain . and so , there be one thing that make I pursue my understanding of human nature , and this remind I of it . these be two woman . woman tend to get intimacy differently than man do . woman get intimacy from face - to - face talk . we swivel towards each other , we do what we call the " anchor gaze " and we talk . this be intimacy to woman . I think it come from million of year of hold that baby in front of your face , cajole it , reprimand it , educate it with word . man tend to get intimacy from side - by - side doing . as soon as one guy look up , the other guy will look away .     ( laughter )     I think it come from million of year sit behind the bush , look straight ahead , try to hit that buffalo on the head with a rock . I think , for million of year , man face their enemy , they sit side - by - side with friend . so my final statement be : love be in we . it be deeply embed in the brain . our challenge be to understand each other .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   who be we ? that be the big question . and essentially we be just an upright - walk , big - brain , super - intelligent ape . this could be we . we belong to the family call the hominidae . we be the specie call homo sapien sapien , and it be important to remember that , in term of our place in the world today and our future on planet earth .     we be one specie of about five and a half thousand mammalian specie that exist on planet earth today . and that be just a tiny fraction of all specie that have ever live on the planet in past time . we be one specie out of approximately , or let us say , at least 16 upright - walk ape that have exist over the past six to eight million year . but as far as we know , we be the only upright - walk ape that exist on planet earth today , except for the bonobo .     and it be important to remember that , because the bonobo be so human , and they share 99 percent of their gene with we . and we share our origin with a handful of the live great ape . it be important to remember that we evolve . now , I know that be a dirty word for some people , but we evolve from common ancestor with the gorilla , the chimpanzee and also the bonobo . we have a common past , and we have a common future . and it be important to remember that all of these great ape have come on as long and as interesting evolutionary journey as we ourselves have today . and it be this journey that be of such interest to humanity , and it be this journey that have be the focus of the past three generation of my family , as we 've be in east africa look for the fossil remain of our ancestor to try and piece together our evolutionary past .     and this be how we look for they . a group of dedicated young man and woman walk very slowly out across vast area of africa , look for small fragment of bone , fossil bone , that may be on the surface . and that be an example of what we may do as we walk across the landscape in northern kenya , look for fossil . I doubt many of you in the audience can see the fossil that be in this picture , but if you look very carefully , there be a jaw , a low jaw , of a 4.1 - million - year - old upright - walk ape as it be find at lake turkana on the west side . ( laughter ) it be extremely time - consume , labor - intensive and it be something that be go to involve a lot more people , to begin to piece together our past . we still really have not get a very complete picture of it .     when we find a fossil , we mark it . today , we 've get great technology : we have gps . we mark it with a gps fix , and we also take a digital photograph of the speciman , so we could essentially put it back on the surface , exactly where we find it . and we can bring all this information into big gis package , today . when we then find something very important , like the bone of a human ancestor , we begin to excavate it extremely carefully and slowly , use dental pick and fine paintbrush . and all the sediment be then put through these screen , and where we go again through it very carefully , look for small bone fragment , and it be then wash .     and these thing be so exciting . they be so often the only , or the very first time that anybody have ever see the remain . and here be a very special moment , when my mother and myself be dig up some remain of human ancestor . and it be one of the most special thing to ever do with your mother . ( laughter ) not many people can say that .     but now , let I take you back to africa , two million year ago . I would just like to point out , if you look at the map of africa , it do actually look like a hominid skull in its shape . now we be go to go to the east african and the rift valley . it essentially run up from the gulf of aden , or run down to lake malawi . and the rift valley be a depression . it be a basin , and river flow down from the highland into the basin , carry sediment , preserve the bone of animal that live there .     if you want to become a fossil , you actually need to die somewhere where your bone will be rapidly bury . you then hope that the earth move in such a way as to bring the bone back up to the surface . and then you hope that one of we lot will walk around and find small piece of you . ( laughter ) ok , so it be absolutely surprising that we know as much as we do know today about our ancestor , because it be incredibly difficult , a , for these thing to become — to be — preserve , and secondly , for they to have be bring back up to the surface . and we really have only spend 50 year look for these remain , and begin to actually piece together our evolutionary story .     so , let us go to lake turkana , which be one such lake basin in the very north of our country , kenya . and if you look north here , there be a big river that flow into the lake that be be carry sediment and preserve the remain of the animal that live there . fossil site run up and down both length of that lake basin , which represent some 20,000 square mile . that be a huge job that we 've get on our hand . two million year ago at lake turkana , homo erectus , one of our human ancestor , actually live in this region . you can see some of the major fossil site that we 've be work in the north . but , essentially , two million year ago , homo erectus , up in the far right corner , live alongside three other specie of human ancestor . and here be a skull of a homo erectus , which I just pull off the shelf there . ( laughter )     but it be not to say that be a single specie on planet earth be the norm . in fact , if you go back in time , it be the norm that there be multiple specie of hominid or of human ancestor that coexist at any one time . where do these thing come from ? that be what we be still try to find answer to , and it be important to realize that there be diversity in all different specie , and our ancestor be no exception . here be some reconstruction of some of the fossil that have be find from lake turkana .     but I be very lucky to have be bring up in kenya , essentially accompany my parent to lake turkana in search of human remain . and we be able to dig up , when we get old enough , fossil such as this , a slender - snoute crocodile . and we dig up giant tortoise , and elephant and thing like that . but when I be 12 , as I be in this picture , a very exciting expedition be in place on the west side , when they find essentially the skeleton of this homo erectus .     I could relate to this homo erectus skeleton very well , because I be the same age that he be when he die . and I imagine he to be tall , dark - skinned . his brother certainly be able to run long distance chase prey , probably sweat heavily as they do so . he be very able to use stone effectively as tool . and this individual himself , this one that I be hold up here , actually have a bad back . he would probably have an injury as a child . he have a scoliosis and therefore must have be look after quite carefully by other female , and probably much small , member of his family group , to have get to where he do in life , age 12 . unfortunately for he , he fall into a swamp and could not get out . essentially , his bone be rapidly bury and beautifully preserve .     and he remain there until 1.6 million year later , when this very famous fossil hunter , kamoya kimeu , walk along a small hillside and find that small piece of his skull lie on the surface amongst the pebble , recognize it as be hominid . it be actually this little piece up here on the top . well , an excavation be begin immediately , and more and more little bit of skull start to be extract from the sediment . and what be so fun about it be this : the skull piece get close and close to the root of the tree , and fairly recently the tree have grow up , but it have find that the skull have capture nice water in the hillside , and so it have decide to grow its root in and around this , hold it in place and prevent it from wash away down the slope . we begin to find limb bone ; we find finger bone , the bone of the pelvis , vertebrae , ribs , the collar bone , thing that have never , ever be see before in homo erectus . it be truly exciting . he have a body very similar to our own , and he be on the threshold of become human .     well , shortly afterwards , member of his specie start to move northward out of africa , and you start to see fossil of homo erectus in georgia , china and also in part of indonesia . so , homo erectus be the first human ancestor to leave africa and begin its spread across the globe . some exciting find , again , as I mention , from dmanisi , in the republic of georgia . but also , surprising find recently announce from the island of flore in indonesia , where a group of these human ancestor have be isolate , and have become dwarfed , and they be only about a meter in height . but they live only 18,000 year ago , and that be truly extraordinary to think about .     just to put this in term of generation , because people do find it hard to think of time , homo erectus leave africa 90,000 generation ago . we evolve essentially from an african stock . again , at about 200,000 year as a fully - fledge we . and we only leave africa about 70,000 year ago . and until 30,000 year ago , at least three upright - walk ape share the planet earth .     the question now be , well , who be we ? we be certainly a pollute , wasteful , aggressive specie , with a few nice thing throw in , perhaps . ( laughter ) for the most part , we be not particularly pleasant at all . we have a much large brain than our ape ancestor . be this a good evolutionary adaptation , or be it go to lead we to be the shortest - live hominid specie on planet earth ?     and what be it that really make we we ? I think it be our collective intelligence . it be our ability to write thing down , our language and our consciousness . from very primitive beginning , with a very crude tool kit of stone , we now have a very advanced tool kit , and our tool use have really reach unprecedented level : we 've get buggy to mar ; we 've map the human genome ; and recently even create synthetic life , thank to craig venter .     and we 've also manage to communicate with people all over the world , from extraordinary place . even from within an excavation in northern kenya , we can talk to people about what we be do . as al gore so clearly have remind we , we have reach extraordinary number of people on this planet . human ancestor really only survive on planet earth , if you look at the fossil record , for about , on average , a million year at a time . we 've only be around for the past 200,000 year as a specie , yet we 've reach a population of more than six and a half billion people .     and last year , our population grow by 80 million . I mean , these be extraordinary number . you can see here , again , take from al gore 's book . but what be happen be our technology have remove the check and balance on our population growth . we have to control our number , and I think this be as important as anything else that be be do in the world today . but we have to control our number , because we can not really hold it together as a specie .     my father so appropriately put it , that " we be certainly the only animal that make conscious choice that be bad for our survival as a specie . " can we hold it together ? it be important to remember that we all evolve in africa . we all have an african origin . we have a common past and we share a common future . evolutionarily speak , we be just a blip . we be sit on the edge of a precipice , and we have the tool and the technology at our hand to communicate what need to be do to hold it together today . we could tell every single human be out there , if we really want to . but will we do that , or will we just let nature take its course ?     well , to end on a very positive note , I think evolutionarily speak , this be probably a fairly good thing , in the end . I 'll leave it at that , thank you very much . ( applause )  
   as a particle physicist , I study the elementary particle and how they interact on the most fundamental level . for most of my research career , I 've be use accelerator , such as the electron accelerator at stanford university , just up the road , to study thing on the small scale . but more recently , I 've be turn my attention to the universe on the large scale . because , as I 'll explain to you , the question on the small and the large scale be actually very connected . so I be go to tell you about our twenty - first - century view of the universe , what it be make of and what the big question in the physical science be — at least some of the big question .     so , recently , we have realize that the ordinary matter in the universe — and by ordinary matter , I mean you , I , the planet , the star , the galaxy — the ordinary matter make up only a few percent of the content of the universe . almost a quarter , or approximately a quarter of the matter in the universe , be stuff that be invisible . by invisible , I mean it do not absorb in the electromagnetic spectrum . it do not emit in the electromagnetic spectrum . it do not reflect . it do not interact with the electromagnetic spectrum , which be what we use to detect thing . it do not interact at all . so how do we know it be there ? we know it be there by its gravitational effect . in fact , this dark matter dominate the gravitational effect in the universe on a large scale , and I 'll be tell you about the evidence for that .     what about the rest of the pie ? the rest of the pie be a very mysterious substance call dark energy . more about that later , ok . so for now , let us turn to the evidence for dark matter . in these galaxy , especially in a spiral galaxy like this , most of the mass of the star be concentrate in the middle of the galaxy . this huge mass of all these star keep star in circular orbit in the galaxy . so we have these star go around in circle like this . as you can imagine , even if you know physics , this should be intuitive , ok — that star that be close to the mass in the middle will be rotate at a high speed than those that be furth out here , ok .     so what you would expect be that if you measure the orbital speed of the star , that they should be slow on the edge than on the inside . in other word , if we measure speed as a function of distance — this be the only time I be go to show a graph , ok — we would expect that it go down as the distance increase from the center of the galaxy . when those measurement be make , instead what we find be that the speed be basically constant , as a function of distance . if it be constant , that mean that the star out here be feel the gravitational effect of matter that we do not see . in fact , this galaxy and every other galaxy appear to be embed in a cloud of this invisible dark matter . and this cloud of matter be much more spherical than the galaxy themselves , and it extend over a much wide range than the galaxy . so we see the galaxy and fixate on that , but it be actually a cloud of dark matter that be dominate the structure and the dynamic of this galaxy .     galaxy themselves be not strew randomly in space ; they tend to cluster . and this be an example of a very , actually , famous cluster , the coma cluster . and there be thousand of galaxy in this cluster . they be the white , fuzzy , elliptical thing here . so these galaxy cluster — we take a snapshot now , we take a snapshot in a decade , it 'll look identical . but these galaxy be actually move at extremely high speed . they be move around in this gravitational potential well of this cluster , ok . so all of these galaxy be move . we can measure the speed of these galaxy , their orbital velocity , and figure out how much mass be in this cluster .     and again , what we find be that there be much more mass there than can be account for by the galaxy that we see . or if we look in other part of the electromagnetic spectrum , we see that there be a lot of gas in this cluster , as well . but that can not account for the mass either . in fact , there appear to be about ten time as much mass here in the form of this invisible or dark matter as there be in the ordinary matter , ok . it would be nice if we could see this dark matter a little bit more directly . I be just put this big , blue blob on there , ok , to try to remind you that it be there . can we see it more visually ? yes , we can .     and so let I lead you through how we can do this . so here be an observer : it could be an eye ; it could be a telescope . and suppose there be a galaxy out here in the universe . how do we see that galaxy ? a ray of light leave the galaxy and travel through the universe for perhaps billion of year before it enter the telescope or your eye . now , how do we deduce where the galaxy be ? well , we deduce it by the direction that the ray be travel as it enter our eye , right ? we say , the ray of light come this way ; the galaxy must be there , ok . now , suppose I put in the middle a cluster of galaxy — and do not forget the dark matter , ok . now , if we consider a different ray of light , one go off like this , we now need to take into account what einstein predict when he develop general relativity . and that be that the gravitational field , due to mass , will deflect not only the trajectory of particle , but will deflect light itself .     so this light ray will not continue in a straight line , but would rather bend and could end up go into our eye . where will this observer see the galaxy ? you can respond . up , right ? we extrapolate backwards and say the galaxy be up here . be there any other ray of light that could make into the observer 's eye from that galaxy ? yes , great . I see people go down like this . so a ray of light could go down , be bent up into the observer 's eye , and the observer see a ray of light here .     now , take into account the fact that we live in a three - dimensional universe , ok , a three - dimensional space . be there any other ray of light that could make it into the eye ? yes ! the ray would lie on a — I would like to see — yeah , on a cone . so there be a whole ray of light — ray of light on a cone — that will all be bend by that cluster and make it into the observer 's eye . if there be a cone of light come into my eye , what do I see ? a circle , a ring . it be call an einstein ring . einstein predict that , ok . now , it will only be a perfect ring if the source , the deflector and the eyeball , in this case , be all in a perfectly straight line . if they be slightly skewed , we 'll see a different image .     now , you can do an experiment tonight over the reception , ok , to figure out what that image will look like . because it turn out that there be a kind of lens that we can devise , that have the right shape to produce this kind of effect . we call this gravitational lensing . and so , this be your instrument , ok . ( laughter ) . but ignore the top part . it be the base that I want you to concentrate , ok . so , actually , at home , whenever we break a wineglass , I save the bottom , take it over to the machine shop . we shave it off , and I have a little gravitational lens , ok . so it be get the right shape to produce the lensing . and so the next thing you need to do in your experiment be grab a napkin . I grab a piece of graph paper — I be a physicist . ( laughter ) so , a napkin . draw a little model galaxy in the middle . and now put the lens over the galaxy , and what you 'll find be that you 'll see a ring , an einstein ring . now , move the base off to the side , and the ring will split up into arcs , ok . and you can put it on top of any image . on the graph paper , you can see how all the line on the graph paper have be distort . and again , this be a kind of an accurate model of what happen with the gravitational lensing .     ok , so the question be : do we see this in the sky ? do we see arc in the sky when we look at , say , a cluster of galaxy ? and the answer be yes . and so , here be an image from the hubble space telescope . many of the image you be see be early from the hubble space telescope . well , first of all , for the golden shape galaxy — those be the galaxy in the cluster . they be the one that be embed in that sea of dark matter that be cause the bending of the light to cause these optical illusion , or mirage , practically , of the background galaxy . so the streak that you see , all these streak , be actually distort image of galaxy that be much far away .     so what we can do , then , be base on how much distortion we see in those image , we can calculate how much mass there must be in this cluster . and it be an enormous amount of mass . and also , you can tell by eye , by look at this , that these arc be not center on individual galaxy . they be center on some more spread out structure , and that be the dark matter in which the cluster be embed , ok . so this be the close you can get to kind of see at least the effect of the dark matter with your naked eye .     ok , so , a quick review then , to see that you be follow . so the evidence that we have that a quarter of the universe be dark matter — this gravitationally attract stuff — be that galaxy , the speed with which star orbit galaxy be much too large ; it must be embed in dark matter . the speed with which galaxy within cluster be orbit be much too large ; it must be embed in dark matter . and we see these gravitational lense effect , these distortion that say that , again , cluster be embed in dark matter .     ok . so now , let us turn to dark energy . so to understand the evidence for dark energy , we need to discuss something that stephen hawking refer to in the previous session . and that be the fact that space itself be expand . so if we imagine a section of our infinite universe — and so I 've put down four spiral galaxy , ok — and imagine that you put down a set of tape measure , so every line on here correspond to a tape measure , horizontal or vertical , for measure where thing be . if you could do this , what you would find that with each pass day , each pass year , each pass billion of year , ok , the distance between galaxy be get great . and it be not because galaxy be move away from each other through space . they be not necessarily move through space . they be move away from each other because space itself be get big , ok . that be what the expansion of the universe or space mean . so they be move far apart .     now , what stephen hawking mention , as well , be that after the big bang , space expand at a very rapid rate . but because gravitationally attract matter be embed in this space , it tend to slow down the expansion of the space , ok . so the expansion slow down with time . so , in the last century , ok , people debate about whether this expansion of space would continue forever ; whether it would slow down , you know , will be slow down , but continue forever ; slow down and stop , asymptotically stop ; or slow down , stop , and then reverse , so it start to contract again . so a little over a decade ago , two group of physicist and astronomer set out to measure the rate at which the expansion of space be slow down , ok . by how much less be it expand today , compare to , say , a couple of billion year ago ?     the startling answer to this question , ok , from these experiment , be that space be expand at a fast rate today than it be a few billion year ago , ok . so the expansion of space be actually speed up . this be a completely surprising result . there be no persuasive theoretical argument for why this should happen , ok . no one be predict ahead of time this be what be go to be find . it be the opposite of what be expect . so we need something to be able to explain that . now it turn out , in the mathematic , you can put it in as a term that be an energy , but it be a completely different type of energy from anything we 've ever see before . we call it dark energy , and it have this effect of cause space to expand . but we do not have a good motivation for put it in there at this point , ok . so it be really unexplained as to why we need to put it in .     now , so at this point , then , what I want to really emphasize to you , be that , first of all , dark matter and dark energy be completely different thing , ok . there be really two mystery out there as to what make up most of the universe , and they have very different effect . dark matter , because it gravitationally attract , it tend to encourage the growth of structure , ok . so cluster of galaxy will tend to form , because of all this gravitational attraction . dark energy , on the other hand , be put more and more space between the galaxy , make it , the gravitational attraction between they decrease , and so it impede the growth of structure . so by look at thing like cluster of galaxy , and how they — their number density , how many there be as a function of time — we can learn about how dark matter and dark energy compete against each other in structure form .     in term of dark matter , I say that we do not have any , you know , really persuasive argument for dark energy . do we have anything for dark matter ? and the answer be yes . we have well - motivate candidate for the dark matter . now , what do I mean by well motivated ? I mean that we have mathematically consistent theory that be actually introduce to explain a completely different phenomenon , ok , thing that I have not even talk about , that each predict the existence of a very weakly interact , new particle .     so , this be exactly what you want in physics : where a prediction come out of a mathematically consistent theory that be actually develop for something else . but we do not know if either of those be actually the dark matter candidate , ok . one or both , who know ? or it could be something completely different . now , we look for these dark matter particle because , after all , they be here in the room , ok , and they do not come in the door . they just pass through anything . they can come through the building , through the earth — they be so non - interact .     so one way to look for they be to build detector that be extremely sensitive to a dark matter particle come through and bump it . so a crystal that will ring if that happen . so one of my colleague up the road and his collaborator have build such a detector . and they 've put it deep down in an iron mine in minnesota , ok , deep under the ground , and in fact , in the last couple of day announce the most sensitive result so far . they have not see anything , ok , but it put limit on what the mass and the interaction strength of these dark matter particle be . there be go to be a satellite telescope launch later this year and it will look towards the middle of the galaxy , to see if we can see dark matter particle annihilate and produce gamma ray that could be detect with this . the large hadron collider , a particle physics accelerator , that we 'll be turn on later this year . it be possible that dark matter particle might be produce at the large hadron collider .     now , because they be so non - interactive , they will actually escape the detector , so their signature will be miss energy , ok . now , unfortunately , there be a lot of new physic whose signature could be miss energy , so it will be hard to tell the difference . and finally , for future endeavor , there be telescope be design specifically to address the question of dark matter and dark energy — ground - base telescope , and there be three space - base telescope that be in competition right now to be launch to investigate dark matter and dark energy . so in term of the big question : what be dark matter ? what be dark energy ? the big question face physic . and I be sure you have lot of question , which I very much look forward to address over the next 72 hour , while I be here . thank you . ( applause )  
   I ’d like to dedicate this next song to carmelo , who be put to sleep a couple of day ago , because he get too old . but apparently he be a very nice dog and he always let the cat sleep in the dog bed .     ♫ ( dog panting noise ) heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh . ♫     ♫ I be just a'walke my dog , singe my song , stroll along . ♫     ♫ yeah , it be just I and my dog , catch some sun . we can not go wrong . ♫     ♫ my life be lonely and blue . ♫     ♫ yeah , I be sad as a sailor , ♫     ♫ I be an angry ' un too . ♫     ♫ then there be you — appear when I be entangle with youth and fear , ♫     ♫ and nerve jingle jangle , vermouth and beer be get I mangle up . ♫     ♫ but then I look in your eye ♫     ♫ and I be no more a failure . ♫     ♫ you look so wacky and wise . ♫     ♫ and I say , " lord , I be happy , 'cause I be just a'walke my dog , ♫     ♫ catch some sun . we can not go wrong . " ♫     ♫ yeah , it be just I and my dog , singe our song , stroll along . ♫     ♫ 'cause I do not care about your hating and your doubt , ♫     ♫ and I do not care what the politician spout . ♫     ♫ if you need a companion , why , just go out to the pound , ♫     ♫ and find yourself a hound , and make that doggie proud , ♫     ♫ 'cause that be what it be all about . ♫     ♫ ( dog panting noise ) heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh , heh . ♫     ♫ my life be tragic and sad . ♫     ♫ I be the archetypal loser . ♫     ♫ I be a pageant go bad . ♫     ♫ and then there be you — on time , and wag your tail ♫     ♫ in the cut mime that you be in jail . ♫     ♫ I say , " woof , be mine ! " and you give a wail and then ♫     ♫ I be no long alone . ♫     ♫ and I be no more a boozer . ♫     ♫ we 'll make the happy home . ♫     ♫ and I say , " lord , I be happy , 'cause I ’m just a'walke my dog , ♫     ♫ singe my song , stroll along . " ♫     ♫ yeah , it be just I and my dog , catch some sun . we can not go wrong , ♫     ♫ 'cause I do not care about your hating and your doubt , ♫     ♫ and I do not care what the politician spout . ♫     ♫ if you need a companion , why , just go out to the pound , ♫     ♫ and find yourself a hound , and make that doggie proud , ♫     ♫ 'cause that be what it be all about , ♫     ♫ that be what it be all about , ♫     ♫ that be what it be all abou - bow - wow - wow - wow ♫     ♫ that be what it be all about . ♫     ♫ ( dog panting noise ) heh , heh , heh , heh , heh . ♫     good dog !     thank you .  
   stephanie white : I be go to let she introduce herself to everybody . can you tell everybody your name ?     einstein : einstein .     sw : this be einstein . can you tell everyone " hi " ?     e : hello .     sw : that be nice . can you be polite ?     e : hi , sweetheart .     sw : much well . well , einstein be very honored to be here at ted 2006 , amongst all you modern - day einstein . in fact , she be very excited .     e : woo .     sw : yeah . ( laughter ) since we 've arrive , there be be a constant buzz about all the exciting speaker here for the conference . this morning we 've hear a lot of whisper about tom reilly 's wrap - up on saturday . einstein , do you hear whisper ?     e : [ squawks ]     sw : yeah . ( laughter ) einstein be especially interested in penelope 's talk . a lot of her research go on in cave , which can get pretty dusty .     e : achoo !     sw : it could make her sneeze . but more importantly , her research could help einstein find a cure for her never - end scratchy throat .     einstein : [ coughs ]     sw : yeah . ( laughter ) well , bob russell be tell we about his work on nanotube in his research at the microscopic level . well , that be really cool , but what einstein 's really hope be that maybe he 'll genetically engineer a five - pound peanut .     e : oh , my god ! my god ! my god !     sw : yeah . she would get really , really excited . ( laughter ) that be one big peanut . since einstein be a bird , she be very interested in thing that fly . she think burt rutan be very impressive .     e : ooh .     sw : yeah . she especially like his late achievement , spaceshipone .     einstein , would you like to ride in burt 's spaceship ? e : [ spaceship noise ] sw : even if it do not have a laser ?     e : [ laser noise ] ( laughter )     sw : yeah , yeah . that be pretty funny , einstein . now , einstein also think , you know , work in cave and travel through space — it be all very dangerous job . it would be very dangerous if you fall down .     e : wheeeeeee ! [ splat ]     sw : yeah . ( laughter ) little splat at the end there . einstein , do that hurt ?     e : ow , ow , ow .     sw : yeah . it be all a lot of hard work .     e : [ squawks ]     sw : yeah . it can get a bird like einstein frustrate .     e : [ squawks ]     sw : yeah , it sure can . but when einstein need to relax from her job educate the public , she love to take in the art . if the child of the uganda need another dance partner , einstein could sure fit the bill , because she love to dance . can you get down ? e : [ bob head ] ( laughter ) sw : let us get down for everybody . come on now . she be go to make I do it , too . ooh , ooh .     einstein : ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh .     sw : do your head now .     e : ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh . ( laughter )     sw : or maybe sirena huang would like to learn some aria on her violin , and einstein can sing along with some opera ?     e : [ operatic squawk ]     sw : very good . ( laughter ) or maybe stu just need another backup singer ? einstein , can you also sing ? I know , you need to get rid of that seed first . can you sing ?     e : la , la .     sw : there you go . and , of course , if all else fail , you can just run off and enjoy a fun fiesta .     e : [ squawks ]     sw : all right . well , einstein be pretty embarrassed to admit this early , but she be tell I backstage that she have a problem .     e : what be the matter ?     sw : no , I do not have a problem . you have the problem , remember ? you be say that you be really embarrassed , because you be in love with a pirate ?     e : yar .     sw : there you go . and what do pirate like to drink ?     e : beer . sw : yeah , that be right . but you do not like to drink beer , einstein . you like to drink water .     e : [ water sound ]     sw : very good . now , really , she be pretty nervous . because one of her favorite folk from back home be here , and she be pretty nervous to meet he . she think al gore be a really good - look man . what do you say to a good - look man ?     e : hey , baby . ( laughter )     sw : and so do all the folk back home in tennessee .     e : yee haw . ( laughter )     sw : and since she be such a big fan , she know that his birthday be come up at the end of march . and we do not think he would be in town then , so einstein want to do something special for he . so let us see if einstein will sing " happy birthday " to al gore . can you sing " happy birthday " to he ?     e : happy birthday to you .     sw : again .     e : happy birthday to you .     sw : again .     e : happy birthday to you .     sw : big finish .     e : happy birthday to you .     sw : good job ! ( applause ) well , before we wrap it up , she would like to give a shout out to all our animal friend back at the knoxville zoo . einstein , do you want to say " hi " to all the owl ?     e : woo , woo , woo .     sw : what about the other bird ?     e : tweet , tweet , tweet .     sw : and the penguin ?     e : quack , quack , quack . sw : there we go . ( laughter ) let us get that one out of there . how about a chimpanzee ?     e : ooh , ooh , ooh . aah , aah , aah .     sw : very good . ( laughter ) what about a wolf ?     e : ooooowww .     sw : and a pig ?     e : oink , oink , oink .     sw : and the rooster ?     e : cock - a - doodle - doo !     sw : and how about those cat ?     e : meow . ( laughter )     sw : at the zoo we have big cat from the jungle .     e : grrrrr . ( laughter )     sw : what about a skunk ?     e : stinker . ( laughter )     sw : she be a comedian . I suppose you think you be famous ? be you famous ?     e : superstar .     sw : yeah . you be a superstar . ( laughter ) well , we would like to encourage all of you to do your part to help protect einstein 's animal friend , and to do your part to help protect their home that they live [ in ] . now , einstein do say it well when we ask she . why do we want to protect your home ?     e : I be special .     sw : you be very special . what would you like to say to all these nice people ?     e : I love you .     sw : that be good . can you blow they a kiss ?     e : [ kiss noise ]     sw : and what do you say when it be time to go ?     e : goodbye .     sw : good job . thank you all . ( applause )  
   when I know I be go to come to speak to you , I think , " I got to call my mother . " I have a little cuban mother — she be about that big . four foot . nothing large than the sum of her figurative part . you still with I ? ( laughter ) I call she up . " hello , how be you do , baby ? " " hey , ma , I get to talk to you . " " you be talk to I already . what be the matter ? " I say , " I 've get to talk to a bunch of nice people . " " you be always talk to nice people , except when you go to the white house . " " ma , do not start ! " and I tell she I be come to ted , and she say , " what be the problem ? " and I say , " well , I be not sure . " I say , " I have to talk to they about story . it be ' technology , entertainment and design . ' " and she say , " well , you design a story when you make it up , it be entertainment when you tell it , and you be go to use a microphone . " ( laughter ) I say , " you be a peach , ma . pop there ? " " what be the matter ? the pearl of wisdom leap from my lip like lemming be no good for you ? " ( laughter ) then my pop get on there . my pop , he be one of the old soul , you know — old cuban man from camaguey . camaguey be a province in cuba . he be from florida . he be bear there in 1924 . he grow up in a bohio of dirt floor , and the structure be the kind use by the taino , our old arawak ancestor . my father be at once quick - witted , wickedly funny , and then poignancy turn on a dime and leave you breathless . " papi , help . " " I already hear your mother . I think she be right . " ( laughter ) " after what I just tell you ? " my whole life , my father 's be there . so we talk for a few minute , and he say , " why do not you tell they what you believe ? " I love that , but we do not have the time . good storytelling be craft a story that someone want to listen to . great story be the art of let go . so I be go to tell you a little story . remember , this tradition come to we not from the mist of avalon , back in time , but far still , before we be scratch out these story on papyrus , or we be do the pictograph on wall in moist , damp cave . back then , we have an urge , a need , to tell the story . when lexus want to sell you a car , they be tell you a story . have you be watch the commercial ? because every one of we have this desire , for once — just once — to tell our story and have it hear . there be story you tell from stage . there be story that you may tell in a small group of people with some good wine . and there be story you tell late at night to a friend , maybe once in your life . and then there be story that we whisper into a stygian darkness . I be not tell you that story . I be tell you this one . it be call , " you be go to miss I . " it be about human connection . my cuban mother , which I just briefly introduce you to in that short character sketch , come to the united states one thousand year ago . I be bear in 19 — I forget , and I come to this country with they in the aftermath of the cuban revolution . we go from havana , cuba to decatur , georgia . and decatur , georgia 's a small southern town . and in that little southern town , I grow up , and grow up hear these story . but this story only happen a few year ago . I call my mom . it be a saturday morning . and I be call about how to make ajiaco . it be a cuban meal . it be delicious . it be savory . it make spit froth in the little corner of your mouth — be that enough ? it make your armpit juicy , you know ? that kind of food , yeah . this be the sensory part of the program , people . I call my mother , and she say , " carman , I need you to come , please . I need to go to the mall , and you know your father now , he take a nap in the afternoon , and I get to go . I get an errand to run . " let I parenthetically pause here and tell you — esther , my mother , have stop drive several year ago , to the collective relief of the entire city of atlanta . any vehicular outing with that woman from the time I be a young child , guy , naturally include flash , blue light . but she would become adept at dodge the boy in blue , and when she do meet they , oh , she have wonderful , well , rapport . " ma'am , do you know that be a light you just run ? " ( spanish ) " you do not speak english ? " " no . " ( laughter ) but eventually , every dog have its day , and she end up in traffic court , where she barter with the judge for a discount . there be a historical marker . but now she be a septuagenarian , she have stop drive . and that mean that everyone in the family have to sign up to take she to have her hair dye , you know , that peculiar color of blue that match her polyester pant suit , you know , same color as the buick . anybody ? all right . little pick on the leg , where she do her needlepoint , and leave little loop . rockport — they be for this . that be why they call they that . ( laughter ) this be her ensemble . and this be the woman that want I to come on a saturday morning when I have a lot to do , but it do not take long because cuban guilt be a weighty thing . I be not go political on you but ... and so , I go to my mother 's . I show up . she be in the carport . of course , they have a carport . the kind with the corrugated roof , you know . the buick 's park outside , and she be jingling , jangle a pair of key . " I get a surprise for you , baby ! " " we take your car ? " " not we , i. " and she reach into her pocket and pull out a catastrophe . somebody be storytelle . interactive art . you can talk to I . oh , a driver 's license , a perfectly valid driver 's license . issue , evidently , by the dmv in her own county of gwinnett . blither fucking idiot . ( laughter ) I say , " be that thing real ? " " I think so . " " can you even see ? " " I guess I must . " " oh , jesus . " she get into the car — she be sit on two phone book . I can not even make this part up because she be that tiny . she be engineer an umbrella so she can — bam ! — slam the door . her daughter , I , the village idiot with the ice cream cone in the middle of her forehead , be still stand there , slack - jaw . " you come ? you no come ? " " oh , my god . " I say , " ok , fine . do pop know you be drive ? " " be you kid I ? " " how be you do it ? " " he be get to sleep sometime . " and so we leave my father fast asleep , because I know he would kill I if I let she go by herself , and we get in the car . put it in reverse . fifty - five out of the driveway , in reverse . I be buckle in seatbelt from the front . I be yank they in from the back . I be do double knot . I mean , I 've get a mouth as dry as the kalahari desert . I 've get a white - knuckle grip on the door . you know what I be talk about ? and she be whistle , and finally I do the kind of birth breathing — you know , that one ? only a couple of woman be go uh - huh , uh - huh , uh - huh . right . and I say , " ma , would you slow down ? " because now she be pick up the highway 285 , the perimeter around atlanta , which encompass now — there be seven lane , she be on all of they , you all . I say , " ma , pick a lane ! " " they give you seven lane , they expect you to use they . " and there she go , right . I do not believe for a minute she have be out and not be stop . so , I think , hey , we can talk . it 'll be a diversion . it 'll help my breathing . it 'll do something for my pulse , maybe . " mommy , I know you have be stop . " " no , no , what you talk about ? " " you have a license . how long have you be drive ? " " four or five day . " " yeah . and you have not be stop ? " " I do not get a ticket . " I say , " yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , but come on , come on , come on . " " ok , so I stop at a light and there be a guy , you know , in the back . " " would this guy have , like , a blue uniform and a terrified look on his face ? " " you be not there , do not start . " " come on . you get a ticket ? " " no . " she explain , " the man " — I have to tell you as she do , because it lose something if I do not , you know — " he come to the window , and he do a thing like this , which tell I he be pretty old , you know . so I look up and I be think , maybe he be still go to think I be kind of cute . " " ma , be you still do that ? " " if it work , it work , baby . so , I say , ' perdon , yo no hablo ingle . ' well , would not you know , he have be in hondura for the peace corps . " ( laughter ) so he be talk to she , and at some point she say , " then , you know , it be it . that be it . it be do . " " yeah ? what ? he give you a ticket ? he do not give you a ticket ? what ? " " no , I look up , and the light , she change . " ( laughter ) you should be terrify . now , I do not know if she be toy with I , kind of like a cat bat back a mouse , bat back a mouse — leave paw , right paw , leave paw , right paw — but by now , we 've reach the mall . now , you have all be at a mall during the holiday , yes ? talk to I . yes . yes . you can say yes . audience : yes . carmen agra deedy : all right , then you know that you have now enter parking lot purgatory , pray to that saint of perpetual availability that as you join that serpentine line of car crawl along , some guy be go to turn on the brake light just as you pull up behind he . but that do not happen most of the time , right ? so , first I say , " ma , why be we here ? " " you mean , like , in the car ? " " no , do not — why be we here today ? it be saturday . it be the holiday . " " because I have to exchange your father 's underwear . " now , see , this be the kind of machiavellian thinking , that you really have to — you know , in my mind , it be a rabbit 's warren , this woman 's mind . do I want to walk in , because unless I have ariadne 's thread to anchor — enough metaphor for you ? — somewhere , I may not get out . but you know . ( laughter ) " why do we have to take pop 's underwear back now ? and why ? what be wrong with his underwear ? " " it will upset you . " " it will not upset I . why ? what ? be something wrong with he ? " " no , no , no . the only thing with he be , he be an idiot . I send he to the store , which be my first mistake , and he go to buy underwear , and he buy the gripper , and he be suppose to buy the boxer . " " why ? " " I read it on the intersnet . you can not have child . " " oh , my god ! " ( laughter ) olivia ? huh ? huh ? by now , we have now crawl another four foot , and my mother finally say to I , " I know it , I know it . I be an immigrant . we make a space . what I tell you ? right there . " and she point out the passenger window , and I look out , and three — three — aisle down , " look , the chevy . " you want to laugh , but you do not know — you be that politically correct , have you notice ? correct the other direction now , it be ok . " look , the chevy — he be come this way . " " mama , mama , mama , wait , wait , wait . the chevy be three aisle away . " she look at I like I be she , you know , her moron child , the cretin , the one she be get to speak to very slowly and distinctly . " I know that , honey . get out of the car and go stand in the parking space till I get there . " ok , I want a vote . come on , come on . no , no . how many of you once in your — you be a kid , you be an adult — you stand in a parking space to hold it for someone ? see , we be a secret club with a secret handshake . ( laughter ) and year of therapy later , we be do great . we be do great . we be do fine . well , I stand up to she . this be — you know , you would think by now I be — and still hold ? I say , " no way , ma , you have embarrass I my entire life . " of course , her comeback be , " when have I embarrass you ? " ( spanish ) and she be still talk while she put the car in park , hit the emergency brake , open the door , and with a spryness astounding in a woman her age , she jump out of the car , knock out the phone book , and then she walk around — she be carry her cheap kmart purse with she — around the front of the car . she have amazing land speed for a woman her age , too . before I know it , she have skiddle across the parking lot and in between the car , and people behind I , with that kind of usual religious charity that the holiday bring we , wah - wah wah - wah . " I be come . " italian hand signal follow . I scoot over . I close the door . I leave the phone book . this be new and fast , just so you — be you still with we ? we 'll wait for the slow one . ok . I start , and this be where a child say to I — and the story do not work if I tell you about she before , because this be my laconic child . a brevity , brevity of everything with this child . you know , she eat small portion . language be something to be mete out in small phoneme , you know — just little hmm , hmm - hmm . she carry a mean spiral notebook and a pen . she wield great power . she listen , because that be what people who tell story do first . but she pause occasionally and say , " how do you spell that ? what year ? ok . " when she write the expose in about 20 year , do not believe a word of it . but this be my daughter , lauren , my remarkable daughter , my borderline asperger 's kid . bless you , dr . watson . she say , " ma , you got to look ! " now , when this kid say I get to look , you know . but it be not like I have not see this crime scene before . I grow up with this woman . I say , " lauren , you know what , give I a play - by - play . I can not . " " no , mama , you got to look . " I get to look . you get to look . do not you want to look ? there she be . I look in bewildered awe : she be stand , those rockport slightly apart , but ground . she be hold out that cheap kmart purse , and she be wield it . she be hold back ton of steel with the sheer force of her little personality , in that crone - ish voice , say thing like , " back it up , buddy ! no , it be reserve ! " ( laughter ) ready ? brace yourself . here it come . " no , my daughter , she be come in the buick . honey , sit up so they can see you . " oh , jesus . oh , jesus . I finally come — and now , it be the south . I do not know what part of the country you live in . I think we all secretly love story . we all secretly want our blankie and our boo bear . we want to curl up and say , " tell it to I , tell it to I . come on , honey , tell it to I . " but in the south , we love a good story . people have pull aside , I mean , they 've come out of that queue line , they have pop their trunk , pull out lawn chair and cool drink . bet be place . " I be with the little lady . damn ! " ( laughter ) and she be bring I in with a slight salsa movement . she be , after all , cuban . I be think , " accelerator , break . accelerator , break . " like you 've never think that in your life ? right ? yeah . I pull in . I put the car in park . engine 's still run — mine , not the car . I jump out next to she go , " do not you move ! " " I be not go anywhere . " she be get front seat in a greek tragedy . I come out , and there be esther . she be hug the purse . " que ? " which mean " what , " and so much more . ( laughter ) " ma , have you no shame ? people be watch we all around , " right ? now , some of they you 've get to make up , people . secret of the trade . guess what ? some of these story I sculpt a little , here and there . some , they be just right there , right there . put they right there . she say this to I . after I say — let I refresh you — " have you no shame ? " " no . I give it up with pantyhose — they be both too binding . " ( laughter ) ( applause ) yeah , you can clap , but then you be about 30 second from the end . I be about to snap like a brittle twig , when suddenly someone tap I on the shoulder . intrepid soul . I be think , " this be my kid . how dare she ? she jump out of that car . " that be ok , because my mother yell at I , I yell at she . it be a beautiful hierarchy , and it work . ( laughter ) I turn around , but it be not a child . it be a young woman , a little tall than I , pale green , amused eye . with she be a young man — husband , brother , lover , it be not my job . and she say , " pardon I , ma'am " — that be how we talk down there — " be that your mother ? " I say , " no , I follow little old woman around parking lot to see if they 'll stop . yes , it be my mother ! " the boy , now , he say . " well , what my sister mean " — they look at each other , it be a know glance — " god , she be crazy ! " I say , ( spanish ) , and the young girl and the young boy say , " no , no , honey , we just want to know one more thing . " I say , " look , please , let I take care of she , ok , because I know she , and believe I , she be like a small atomic weapon , you know , you just want to handle she really gingerly . " and the girl go , " I know , but , I mean , I swear to god , she remind we of our mother . " I almost miss it . he turn to she on the heel of his shoe . it be a half - whisper , " god , I miss she . " they turn then , shoulder to shoulder , and walk away , lose in their own reverie . memory of some madden woman who be the luck of their dna draw . and I turn to esther , who be rock on those ' port , and say , " you know what , honey ? " " what , ma ? " " I be go to drive you crazy probably for about 14 , 15 more year , if you be lucky , but after that , honey , you be go to miss I . " ( applause )  
   hi . I be here to talk to you about the importance of praise , admiration and thank you , and have it be specific and genuine .     and the way I get interested in this be , I notice in myself , when I be grow up , and until about a few year ago , that I would want to say thank you to someone , I would want to praise they , I would want to take in their praise of I and I would just stop it . and I ask myself , why ? I feel shy , I feel embarrassed . and then my question become , be I the only one who do this ? so , I decide to investigate .     I be fortunate enough to work in the rehab facility , so I get to see people who be face life and death with addiction . and sometimes it come down to something as simple as , their core wound be their father die without ever say he be proud of they . but then , they hear from all the family and friend that the father tell everybody else that he be proud of he , but he never tell the son . it be because he do not know that his son need to hear it .     so my question be , why do not we ask for the thing that we need ? I know a gentleman , marry for 25 year , who be longing to hear his wife say , " thank you for be the breadwinner , so I can stay home with the kid , " but will not ask . I know a woman who be good at this . she , once a week , meet with her husband and say , " I would really like you to thank I for all these thing I do in the house and with the kid . " and he go , " oh , this be great , this be great . " and praise really do have to be genuine , but she take responsibility for that . and a friend of mine , april , who I 've have since kindergarten , she thank her child for do their chore . and she say , " why would not I thank it , even though they be suppose to do it ? "     so , the question be , why be I block it ? why be other people block it ? why can I say , " I 'll take my steak medium rare , I need size six shoe , " but I will not say , " would you praise I this way ? " and it be because I be give you critical datum about I . I be tell you where I be insecure . I be tell you where I need your help . and I be treat you , my inner circle , like you be the enemy . because what can you do with that data ? you could neglect I . you could abuse it . or you could actually meet my need .     and I take my bike into the bike store — I love this — same bike , and they would do something call " true " the wheel . the guy say , " you know , when you true the wheel , it be go to make the bike so much well . " I get the same bike back , and they 've take all the little warp out of those same wheel I 've have for two and a half year , and my bike be like new . so , I be go to challenge all of you . I want you to true your wheel : be honest about the praise that you need to hear . what do you need to hear ? go home to your wife — go ask she , what do she need ? go home to your husband — what do he need ? go home and ask those question , and then help the people around you .     and it be simple . and why should we care about this ? we talk about world peace . how can we have world peace with different culture , different language ? I think it start household by household , under the same roof . so , let us make it right in our own backyard . and I want to thank all of you in the audience for be great husband , great mother , friend , daughter , son . and maybe somebody be never say that to you , but you 've do a really , really good job . and thank you for be here , just show up and change the world with your idea .     thank you . ( applause )  
   so , indeed , I have spend my life look into the life of president who be no long alive . wake up with abraham lincoln in the morning , thinking of franklin roosevelt when I go to bed at night . but when I try and think about what I 've learn about the meaning in life , my mind keep wander back to a seminar that I take when I be a graduate student at harvard with the great psychologist erik erikson .     he teach we that the rich and full life attempt to achieve an inner balance between three realm : work , love and play . and that to pursue one realm to the disregard of the other , be to open oneself to ultimate sadness in old age . whereas to pursue all three with equal dedication , be to make possible a life fill not only with achievement , but with serenity .     so since I tell story , let I look back on the life of two of the president I 've study to illustrate this point — abraham lincoln and lyndon johnson . as for that first sphere of work , I think what abraham lincoln 's life suggest be that fierce ambition be a good thing . he have a huge ambition . but it be not simply for office or power or celebrity or fame — what it be for be to accomplish something worthy enough in life so that he could make the world a little well place for his having live in it .     even as a child , it seem , lincoln dreamed heroic dream . he somehow have to escape that hard - scrabble farm from which he be bear . no schooling be possible for he , except a few week here , a few week there . but he read book in every spare moment he could find . it be say when he get a copy of the king james bible or " aesop 's fable , " he be so excited he could not sleep . he could not eat . the great poet emily dickinson once say , " there be no frigate like a book to take we land away . " how true for lincoln .     though he never would travel to europe , he go with shakespeare 's king to merry england , he go with lord byron 's poetry to spain and portugal . literature allow he to transcend his surrounding . but there be so many loss in his early life that he be haunt by death . his mother die when he be only nine year old ; his only sister , sarah , in childbirth a few year later ; and his first love , ann rutledge , at the age of 22 . moreover , when his mother lie die , she do not hold out for he the hope that they would meet in an afterworld . she simply say to he , " abraham , I be go away from you now , and I shall never return . " as a result he become obsessed with the thought that when we die our life be sweep away — dust to dust .     but only as he grow old do he develop a certain consolation from an ancient greek notion — but follow by other culture as well — that if you could accomplish something worthy in your life , you could live on in the memory of other . your honor and your reputation would outlive your earthly existence . and that worthy ambition become his lodestar . it carry he through the one significant depression that he suffer when he be in his early 30 .     three thing have combine to lay he low . he have break his engagement with mary todd , not certain he be ready to marry she , but know how devastating it be to she that he do that . his one intimate friend , joshua speed , be leave illinois to go back to kentucky because speed 's father have die . and his political career in the state legislature be on a downward slide . he be so depressed that friend worry he be suicidal . they take all knife and razor and scissor from his room . and his great friend speed go to his side and say , " lincoln , you must rally or you will die . " he say that , " I would just as soon die right now , but I 've not yet do anything to make any human being remember that I have live . "     so fuel by that ambition , he return to the state legislature . he eventually win a seat in congress . he then run twice for the senate , lose twice . " everyone be break by life , " ernest hemingway once say , " but some people be strong in the broken place . " so then he surprise the nation with an upset victory for the presidency over three far more experienced , far more educate , far more celebrated rival . and then when he win the general election , he stun the nation even more by appoint each of these three rival into his cabinet . it be an unprecedented act at the time because everybody think , " he 'll look like a figurehead compare to these people . " they say , " why be you do this , lincoln ? " he say , " look , these be the strong and most able man in the country . the country be in peril . I need they by my side . " but perhaps my old friend lyndon johnson might have put it in less noble fashion : " well to have your enemy inside the tent piss out , than outside the tent piss in . " ( laughter )     but it soon become clear that abraham lincoln would emerge as the undisputed captain of this unruly team . for each of they soon come to understand that he possess an unparalleled array of emotional strength and political skill that prove far more important than the thinness of his external résumé . for one thing , he possess an uncanny ability to empathize with and to think about other people ' point of view . he repair injured feeling that might have escalate into permanent hostility . he share credit with ease , assume responsibility for the failure of his subordinate , constantly acknowledge his error and learn from his mistake . these be the quality we should be look for in our candidate in 2008 . ( applause ) he refuse to be provoke by petty grievance . he never submit to jealousy or brood over perceive slight . and he express his unshakeable conviction in everyday language , in metaphor , in story . and with a beauty of language — almost as if the shakespeare and the poetry he have so love as a child have work their way into his very soul .     in 1863 , when the emancipation proclamation be sign , he bring his old friend , joshua speed , back to the white house , and remember that conversation of decade before , when he be so sad . and he , point to the proclamation , say , " I believe , in this measure , my fond hope will be realize . " but as he be about to put his signature on the proclamation his own hand be numb and shake because he have shake a thousand hand that morning at a new year 's reception . so he put the pen down . he say , " if ever my soul be in an act , it be in this act . but if I sign with a shake hand , posterity will say , ' he hesitate . ' " so he wait until he could take up the pen and sign with a bold and clear hand . but even in his wild dream , lincoln could never have imagine how far his reputation would reach .     I be so thrilled to find an interview with the great russian writer , leo tolstoy , in a new york newspaper in the early 1900 . and in it , tolstoy tell of a trip that he would recently make to a very remote area of the caucasus , where there be only wild barbarian , who have never leave this part of russia . know that tolstoy be in their midst , they ask he to tell story of the great man of history . so he say , " I tell they about napoleon and alexander the great and frederick the great and julius caesar , and they love it . but before I finish , the chief of the barbarian stand up and say , ' but wait , you have not tell we about the great ruler of they all . we want to hear about that man who speak with a voice of thunder , who laugh like the sunrise , who come from that place call america , which be so far from here , that if a young man should travel there , he would be an old man when he arrive . tell we of that man . tell we of abraham lincoln . ' " he be stun . he tell they everything he could about lincoln . and then in the interview he say , " what make lincoln so great ? not as great a general as napoleon , not as great a statesman as frederick the great . " but his greatness consist , and historian would roundly agree , in the integrity of his character and the moral fiber of his being .     so in the end that powerful ambition that have carry lincoln through his bleak childhood have be realize . that ambition that have allow he to laboriously educate himself by himself , to go through that string of political failure and the dark day of the war . his story would be tell . so as for that second sphere , not of work , but of love — encompass family , friend and colleague — it , too , take work and commitment . the lyndon johnson that I see in the last year of his life , when I help he on his memoir , be a man who have spend so many year in the pursuit of work , power and individual success , that he have absolutely no psychic or emotional resource leave to get he through the day once the presidency be go .     my relationship with he begin on a rather curious level . I be select as a white house fellow when I be 24 year old . we have a big dance at the white house . president johnson do dance with I that night . not that peculiar — there be only three woman out of the 16 white house fellow . but he do whisper in my ear that he want I to work directly for he in the white house . but it be not to be that simple . for in the month lead up to my selection , like many young people , I would be active in the anti - vietnam war movement , and have write an article against lyndon johnson , which unfortunately come out in the new republic two day after the dance in the white house . ( laugher ) and the theme of the article be how to remove lyndon johnson from power . ( laughter ) so I be certain he would kick I out of the program . but instead , surprisingly , he say , " oh , bring she down here for a year , and if I can not win she over , no one can . " so I do end up work for he in the white house . eventually accompany he to his ranch to help he on those memoir , never fully understand why he have choose I to spend so many hour with .     I like to believe it be because I be a good listener . he be a great storyteller . fabulous , colorful , anecdotal story . there be a problem with these story , however , which I later discover , which be that half of they be not true . but they be great , nonetheless . ( laughter ) so I think that part of his attraction for I be that I love listen to his tall tale . but I also worry that part of it be that I be then a young woman . and he have somewhat of a minor league womanizing reputation . so I constantly chat to he about boyfriend , even when I do not have any at all .     everything be work perfectly , until one day he say he want to discuss our relationship . sound very ominous when he take I nearby to the lake , conveniently call lake lyndon baines johnson . and there be wine and cheese and a red - check tablecloth — all the romantic trapping . and he start out , " doris , more than any other woman I have ever know ... " and my heart sink . and then he say , " you remind I of my mother . " ( laughter )     it be pretty embarrassing , give what be go on in my mind . but I must say , the old I 've get , the more I realize what an incredible privilege it be to have spend so many hour with this age lion of a man . a victor in a thousand contest , three great civil right law , medicare , aid to education . and yet , roundly defeat in the end by the war in vietnam . and because he be so sad and so vulnerable , he open up to I in way he never would have have I know he at the height of his power — share his fear , his sorrow and his worry . and I would like to believe that the privilege fire within I the drive to understand the inner person behind the public figure , that I 've try to bring to each of my book since then .     but it also bring home to I the lesson which erik erikson have try to instill in all of we about the importance of find balance in life . for on the surface , lyndon johnson should have have everything in the world to feel good about in those last year , in the sense that he have be elect to the presidency ; he have all the money he need to pursue any leisure activity he want ; he own a spacious ranch in the countryside , a penthouse in the city , sailboat , speedboat . he have servant to answer any whim , and he have a family who love he deeply .     and yet , year of concentration solely on work and individual success mean that in his retirement he could find no solace in family , in recreation , in sport or in hobby . it be almost as if the hole in his heart be so large that even the love of a family , without work , could not fill it . as his spirit sag , his body deteriorate until , I believe , he slowly bring about his own death . in those last year , he say he be so sad watch the american people look toward a new president and forget he . he speak with immense sadness in his voice , say maybe he should have spend more time with his child , and their child in turn . but it be too late . despite all that power , all that wealth , he be alone when he finally die — his ultimate terror realize .     so as for that third sphere of play , which he never have learn to enjoy , I 've learn over the year that even this sphere require a commitment of time and energy — enough so that a hobby , a sport , a love of music , or art , or literature , or any form of recreation , can provide true pleasure , relaxation and replenishment . so deep , for instance , be abraham lincoln 's love of shakespeare , that he make time to spend more than a hundred night in the theater , even during those dark day of the war . he say , when the light go down and a shakespeare play come on , for a few precious hour he could imagine himself back in prince hal 's time .     but an even more important form of relaxation for he , that lyndon johnson never could enjoy , be a love of — somehow — humor , and feel out what hilarious part of life can produce as a sidelight to the sadness . he once say that he laugh so he do not cry , that a good story , for he , be well than a drop of whiskey . his storytelle power have first be recognize when he be on the circuit in illinois . the lawyer and the judge would travel from one county courthouse to the other , and when anyone be know lincoln be in town , they would come from mile around to listen to he tell story . he would stand with his back against a fire and entertain the crowd for hour with his winding tale . and all these story become part of his memory bank , so he could call on they whenever he need to . and they be not quite what you might expect from our marble monument .     one of his favorite story , for example , have to do with the revolutionary war hero , ethan allen . and as lincoln tell the story , mr . allen go to britain after the war . and the british people be still upset about lose the revolution , so they decide to embarrass he a little bit by put a huge picture of general washington in the only outhouse , where he would have to encounter it . they figure he would be upset about the indignity of george washington be in an outhouse . but he come out of the outhouse not upset at all . and so they say , " well , do you see george washington in there ? " " oh , yes , " he say , " perfectly appropriate place for he . " " what do you mean ? " they say . " well , " he say , " there be nothing to make an englishman shit fast than the sight of general george washington . " ( laughter ) ( applause )     so you can imagine , if you be in the middle of a tense cabinet meeting — and he have hundred of these story — you would have to relax . so between his nightly trek to the theater , his story telling , and his extraordinary sense of humor and his love of quote shakespeare and poetry , he find that form of play which carry he through his day . in my own life , I shall always be grateful for having find a form of play in my irrational love of baseball . which allow I , from the beginning of spring training to the end of the fall , to have something to occupy my mind and heart other than my work .     it all begin when I be only six year old , and my father teach I that mysterious art of keep score while listen to baseball game — so that when he go to work in new york during the day , I could record for he the history of that afternoon 's brooklyn dodgers game . now , when you be only six year old , and your father come home every single night and listen to you — as I now realize that I , in excruciating detail , recount every single play of every inning of the game that have just take place that afternoon . but he make I feel I be tell he a fabulous story . it make you think there be something magic about history to keep your father 's attention .     in fact , I be convince I learn the narrative art from those nightly session with my father . because at first , I would be so excited I would blurt out , " the dodger win ! " or , " the dodger lose ! " which take much of the drama of this two - hour telling away . ( laughter ) so I finally learn you have to tell a story from begin to middle to end . I must say , so fervent be my love of the old brooklyn dodger in those day that I have to confess in my first confession two sin that relate to baseball .     the first occur because the dodger ' catcher , roy campanella , come to my hometown of rockville centre , long island , just as I be in preparation for my first holy communion . and I be so excited — first person I would ever see outside of ebbet field . but it so happen he be speak in a protestant church . when you be bring up as a catholic , you think that if you ever set foot in a protestant church , you 'll be strike dead at the threshold . so I go to my father in tear , " what be we go to do ? " he say , " do not worry . he be speak in a parish hall . we be sit in fold chair . he be talk about sportsmanship . it be not a sin . " but as I leave that night , I be certain that somehow I have trade the life of my everlasting soul for this one night with roy campanella . ( laughter ) and there be no indulgence around that I could buy . so I have this sin on my soul when I go to my first confession . I tell the priest right away . he say , " no problem . it be not a religious service . " but then , unfortunately , he say , " and what else , my child ? "     and then come my second sin . I try to sandwich it in between talk too much in church , wish harm to other , be mean to my sister . and he say , " to whom do you wish harm ? " and I have to say that I wish that various new york yankees player would break arm , leg and ankle — ( laughter ) — so that the brooklyn dodger could win their first world series . he say , " how often do you make these horrible wish ? " and I have to say , every night when I say my prayer . ( laughter ) so he say , " look , I 'll tell you something . I love the brooklyn dodger , as you do , but I promise you some day they will win fairly and squarely . you do not need to wish harm on other to make it happen . " " oh yes , " I say . but luckily , my first confession — to a baseball - love priest ! ( laughter )     well , though my father die of a sudden heart attack when I be still in my 20 , before I have get marry and have my three son , I have pass his memory — as well as his love of baseball — on to my boy . though when the dodger abandon we to come to l.a . , I lose faith in baseball until I move to boston and become an irrational red sock fan . and I must say , even now , when I sit with my son with our season ticket , I can sometimes close my eye against the sun and imagine myself , a young girl once more , in the presence of my father , watch the player of my youth on the grassy field below : jackie robinson , roy campanella , pee wee reese , and duke snider .     I must say there be magic in these moment . when I open my eye and I see my son in the place where my father once sit , I feel an invisible loyalty and love link my son to the grandfather whose face they never have a chance to see , but whose heart and soul they have come to know through all the story I have tell . which be why , in the end , I shall always be grateful for this curious love of history , allow I to spend a lifetime look back into the past . allow I to learn from these large figure about the struggle for meaning for life . allow I to believe that the private people we have love and lose in our family , and the public figure we have respect in our history , just as abraham lincoln want to believe , really can live on , so long as we pledge to tell and to retell the story of their life . thank you for let I be that storyteller today . ( applause ) thank you .  
   you might be wonder why I be wear sunglass , and one answer to that is , because I be here to talk about glamour . so , we all think we know what glamour be . here it be . it be glamorous movie star , like marlene dietrich . and it come in a male form , too — very glamorous . not only can he shoot , drive , drink — you know , he drink wine , there actually be a little wine in there — and of course , always wear a tuxedo . but I think that glamour actually have a much broad meaning — one that be true for the movie star and the fictional character , but also come in other form .     a magazine ? well , it be certainly not this one . this be the least glamorous magazine on the newsstand — it be all about sex tip . sex tip be not glamorous . and draw barrymore , for all her wonderful charm , be not glamorous either . but there be a glamour of industry . this be margaret bourke - white 's — one of her picture she do . fantastic , glamorous picture of steel mill and paper mill and all kind of glamorous industrial place . and there be the mythic glamour of the garage entrepreneur . this be the hewlett - packard garage . we know everyone who start a business in a garage end up found hewlett - packard . there be the glamour of physics . what could be more glamorous than understand the entire universe , grand unification ? and , by the way , it help if you be brian greene — he have other kind of glamour .     and there be , of course , this glamour . this be very , very glamorous : the glamour of outer space — and not the alien - style glamour , but the nice , clean , early ' 60 version . so what do we mean by glamour ? well , one thing you can do if you want to know what glamour mean be you can look in the dictionary . and it actually help a lot more if you look in a very old dictionary , in this case the 1913 dictionary . because for century , glamour have a very particular meaning , and the word be actually use differently from the way we think of it . you have " a " glamour . it be not glamour as a quality — you " cast a glamour . " glamour be a literal magic spell . not a metaphorical one , the way we use it today , but a literal magic spell associate with witch and gypsy and to some extent , celtic magic . and over the year , around the turn of the 20th century , it start to take on this other kind of deception — this definition for any artificial interest in , or association with , an object through which it appear delusively magnify or glorify . but still , glamour be an illusion . glamour be a magic spell . and there be something dangerous about glamour throughout most of history . when the witch cast a magic spell on you , it be not in your self - interest — it be to get you to act against your interest .     well of course , in the 20th century , glamour come to have this different meaning associate with hollywood . and this be hedy lamarr . hedy lamarr say , " anyone can look glamorous , all you have to do be sit there and look stupid . " ( laughter ) but in fact , with all due respect to hedy — about whom we 'll hear more later — there be a lot more to it . there be a tremendous amount of technical achievement associate with create this hollywood glamour . there be score of retoucher and light expert and make - up expert . you can go to the museum of hollywood history in hollywood and see max factor 's special room that he paint different color depend on the complexion of the star he be go to make up . so you 've get this highly stylize portrait of something that be not entirely of this earth — it be a portrait of a star . and actually , we see glamorized photo of star all the time — they call they false color .     glamour be a form of falsification , but falsification to achieve a particular purpose . it may be to illuminate the star ; it may be to sell a film . and it involve a great deal of technique . it be not — glamour be not something — you do not wake up in the morning glamorous . I do not care who you be . even nicole kidman do not wake up in the morning glamorous . there be a process of " idealization , glorification and dramatization , " and it be not just the case for people . glamour do not have to be people . architectural photography — julius schulman , who have talk about transfiguration , take this fabulous , famous picture of the kauffman house . architectural photography be extremely glamorous . it put you into this special , special world . this be alex ross 's comic book art , which appear to be extremely realistic , as part of his style be he give you a kind of realism in his comic art . except that light do not work this way in the real world .     when you stack people in row , the one in the background look small than the one in the foreground — but not in the world of glamour . what glamour be all about — I take this from a blurb in the table of content of new york magazine , which be tell we that glamour be back — glamour be all about transcend the everyday . and I think that that be start to get at what the core that combine all sort of glamour be . this be filippino lippi 's 1543 portrait of saint apollonia . and I do not know who she be either , but this be the [ 16th ] century equivalent of a supermodel . it be a very glamorous portrait . why be it glamorous ? it be glamorous , first , because she be beautiful — but that do not make you glamorous , that only make you beautiful . she be graceful , she be mysterious and she be transcendent , and those be the central quality of glamour . you do not see her eye ; they be look downward . she be not look away from you exactly , but you have to mentally imagine her world . she be encourage you to contemplate this high world to which she belong , where she can be completely tranquil while hold the iron instrument of her death by torture . mel gibson 's " passion of the christ " — not glamorous . that be glamour : that be michelangelo 's " pieta , " where mary be the same age as jesus and they be both awfully happy and pleasant .     glamour invite we to live in a different world . it have to simultaneously be mysterious , a little bit distant — that be why , often in these glamour shot , the person be not look at the audience , it be why sunglass be glamorous — but also not so far above we that we can not identify with the person . in some sense , there have to be something like we . so as I say , in religious art , you know , god be not glamorous . god can not be glamorous because god be omnipotent , omniscient — too far above we . and yet you will see in religious art , saint or the virgin mary will often be portray — not always — in glamorous form . as I say early , glamour do not have to be about people , but it have to have this transcendent quality . what be it about superman ? aside from alex ross 's style , which be very glamorous , one thing about superman be he make you believe that a man can fly .     glamour be all about transcend this world and get to an idealize , perfect place . and this be one reason that mode of transportation tend to be extremely glamorous . the less experience we have with they , the more glamorous they be . so you can do a glamorized picture of a car , but you can not do a glamorized picture of traffic . you can do a glamorized picture of an airplane , but not the inside . the notion be that it be go to transport you , and the story be not about , you know , the guy in front of you in the airplane , who have this nasty little kid , or the big cough . the story be about where you be arrive , or think about where you be arrive . and this sense of be transport be one reason that we have glamour styling . this sort of streamline styling be not just glamorous because we associate it with movie of that period , but because , in it be streamline , it transport we from the everyday .     the same thing — arch be very glamorous . arch with stain glass — even more glamorous . staircase that curve away from you be glamorous . I happen to find that particular staircase picture very glamorous because , to I , it capture the whole promise of the academic contemplative life — but maybe that be because I go to princeton . anyway , skyline be super glamorous , city street — not so glamorous . you know , when you get , actually to this town it have reality . the horizon , the open road , be very , very glamorous . there be few thing more glamorous than the horizon — except , possibly , multiple horizon . of course , here you do not feel the cold , or the heat — you just see the possibility . in order to pull glamour off , you need this renaissance quality of sprezzatura , which be a term coin by castiglione in his book , " the book of the courtier . " there be the not - glamorous version of what it look like today , after a few century .     and sprezzatura be the art that conceal art . it make thing look effortless . you do not think about how nicole kidman be maneuver that dress — she just look completely natural . and I remember reading , after the lara croft movie , how angelina jolie would go home completely black and blue . of course , they cover that with make - up , because lara croft do all those same stunt — but she do not get black and blue , because she have sprezzatura . " to conceal all art and make whatever be do or say appear to be without effort " : and this be one of the critical aspect of glamour . glamour be about editing . how do you create the sense of transcendence , the sense of evoke a perfect world ? the sense of , you know , life could be well , I could join this — I could be a perfect person , I could join this perfect world . we do not tell you all the grubby detail .     now , this be kindly lend to I by jeff bezos , from last year . this be underneath jeff 's desk . this be what the real world of computer , lamp , electrical appliance of all kind , look like . but if you look in a catalog — particularly a catalog of modern , beautiful object for your home — it look like this . there be no cord . look next time you get these catalog in your mail — you can usually figure out where they hide the cord . but there be always this illusion that if you buy this lamp , you will live in a world without cord . ( laughter ) and the same thing be true of , if you buy this laptop or you buy this computer — and even in these wireless era , you do not get to live in the world without cord . you have to have mystery and you have to have grace . and there she be — grace . this be the most glamorous picture , I think , ever . part of the thing be that , in " rear window , " the question be , be she too glamorous to live in his world ? and the answer be no , but of course it be really just a movie .     here be hedy lamarr again . and , you know , this kind of head covering be extremely glamorous because , like sunglass , it conceal and reveal at the same time . translucence be glamorous — that be you all these people wear pearl . it be why barware be glamorous . glamour be translucent — not transparent , not opaque . it invite we into the world but it do not give we a completely clear picture . and I think if grace kelly be the most glamorous person , maybe a spiral staircase with glass block may be the most glamorous interior shot , because a spiral staircase be incredibly glamorous . it have that sense of go up and away , and yet you never think about how you would really trip if you be — particularly go down . and of course glass block have that sense of translucence . so , this session 's suppose to be about pure pleasure but glamour 's really partly about meaning . all individual and all culture have ideal that can not possibly be realize in reality .     they have contradiction , they uphold principle that be incommensurable with each other — whatever it be — and yet these ideal give meaning and purpose to our life as culture and as individual . and the way we deal with that be we displace they — we put they into a golden world , an imagine world , an age of hero , the world to come . and in the life of an individual , we often associate that with some object . the white picket fence , the perfect house . the perfect kitchen — no bill on the counter in the perfect kitchen . you know , you buy that vike range , this be what your kitchen will look like . the perfect love life — symbolize by the perfect necklace , the perfect diamond ring . the perfect getaway in your perfect car . this be an interior design firm that be literally call utopia . the perfect office — again , no cord , as far as I can tell . and certainly , no , it do not look a thing like my office . I mean , there be no paper on the desk . we want this golden world . and some people get rich enough , and if they have their ideal — in a sort of domestic sense , they get to acquire their perfect world .     dean koontz build this fabulous home theater , which be — I do not think accidentally — in art deco style . that symbolize this sense of be safe and at home . this be not always good , because what be your perfect world ? what be your ideal , and also , what have be edit out ? be it something important ? " the matrix " be a movie that be all about glamour . I could do a whole talk on " the matrix " and glamour . it be criticize for glamorizing violence , because , look — sunglass and those long coat , and , of course , they could walk up wall and do all these kind of thing that be impossible in the real world . this be another margaret bourke - white photo . this be from soviet union . attractive . I mean , look how happy the people be , and good - look too . you know , we be march toward utopia .     I be not a fan of peta , but I think this be a great ad . because what they be do be they be say , your coat 's not so glamorous , what be be edit out be something important . but actually , what be even more important than remember what be be edit out be think , be the ideal good ? because glamour can be very totalitarian and deceptive . and it be not just a matter of glamorize clean your floor . this be from " triumph of the will " — brilliant editing to cut together thing . there be a glamour shot . national socialism be all about glamour . it be a very aesthetic ideology . it be all about clean up germany , and the west , and the world , and rid it of anything unglamorous . so glamour can be dangerous .     I think glamour have a genuine appeal , have a genuine value . I be not against glamour . but there be a kind of wonder in the stuff that gets edit away in the cord of life . and there be both a way to avoid the danger of glamour and a way to broaden your appreciation of it . and that be to take isaac mizrahi 's advice and confront the manipulation of it all , and sort of admit that manipulation be something that we enjoy , but also enjoy how it happen . and here be hedy lamarr . she be very glamorous but , you know , she invent spread - spectrum technology . so she be even more glamorous if you know that she really be not stupid , even though she think she could look stupid .     david hockney talk about how the appreciation of this very glamorous painting be heighten if you think about the fact that it take two week to paint this splash , which only take a fraction of a second to happen . there be a book out in the bookstore — it be call " symphony in steel , " and it be about the stuff that be hide under the skin of the disney center . and that have a fascination . it be not necessarily glamorous , but unveil the glamour have an appeal . there be a wonderful book call " crown " that be all these glamour picture of black woman in their church hat . and there be a quote from one of these woman , and she talk about , " as a little girl , I would admire woman at church with beautiful hat . they look like beautiful doll , like they would just step out of a magazine . but I also know how hard they work all week . sometimes under those hat there be a lot of joy and a lot of sorrow . " and , actually , you get more appreciation for glamour when you realize what go into create it . thank you .  
   when I first arrive in beautiful zimbabwe , it be difficult to understand that 35 percent of the population be hiv positive . it really be not until I be invite to the home of people that I start to understand the human toll of the epidemic . for instance , this be herbert with his grandmother . when I first meet he , he be sit on his grandmother 's lap . he have be orphan , as both of his parent die of aids , and his grandmother take care of he until he too die of aids . he like to sit on her lap because he say that it be painful for he to lie in his own bed . when she get up to make tea , she place he in my own lap and I have never feel a child that be that emaciated . before I leave , I actually ask he if I could get he something . I think he would ask for a toy , or candy , and he ask I for slipper , because he say that his foot be cold .     this be joyce who be — in this picture — 21 . single mother , hiv positive . I photograph she before and after the birth of her beautiful baby girl , issa . and I be last week walk on lafayette street in manhattan and get a call from a woman who I do not know , but she call to tell I that joyce have pass away at the age of 23 . joyce 's mother be now take care of her daughter , like so many other zimbabwean child who 've be orphan by the epidemic . so a few of the story . with every picture , there be individual who have full life and story that deserve to be tell . all these picture be from zimbabwe .     chris anderson : kirsten , will you just take one minute , just to tell your own story of how you get to africa ?     kirsten ashburn : mmm , gosh .     can : just —     ka : actually , I be work at the time , do production for a fashion photographer . and I be constantly read the new york time , and stun by the statistic , the number . it be just frightening . so I quit my job and decide that that be the subject that I want to tackle . and I first actually go to botswana , where I spend a month — this be in december 2000 — then go to zimbabwe for a month and a half , and then go back again this march 2002 for another month and a half in zimbabwe .     can : that be an amazing story , thank you .     kb : thank for let I show these .  
   I spend the well part of a decade look at american response to mass atrocity and genocide . and I would like to start by share with you one moment that to I sum up what there be to know about american and democratic response to mass atrocity .     and that moment come on april 21 , 1994 . so 14 year ago , almost , in the middle of the rwandan genocide , in which 800,000 people would be systematically exterminate by the rwandan government and some extremist militia . on april 21 , in the new york times , the paper report that somewhere between 200,000 and 300,000 people have already be kill in the genocide . it be in the paper — not on the front page . it be a lot like the holocaust coverage , it be bury in the paper . rwanda itself be not see as newsworthy , and amazingly , genocide itself be not see as newsworthy .     but on april 21 , a wonderfully honest moment occur . and that be that an american congresswoman name patricia schroeder from colorado meet with a group of journalist . and one of the journalist say to she , what be up ? what be go on in the u.s . government ? two to 300,000 people have just be exterminate in the last couple of week in rwanda . it be two week into the genocide at that time , but of course , at that time you do not know how long it be go to last . and the journalist say , why be there so little response out of washington ? why no hearing , no denunciation , no people getting arrest in front of the rwandan embassy or in front of the white house ? what be the deal ? and she say — she be so honest — she say , " it be a great question . all I can tell you be that in my congressional office in colorado and my office in washington , we be get hundred and hundred of call about the endangered ape and gorilla population in rwanda , but nobody be call about the people . the phone just be not ring about the people . "     and the reason I give you this moment be there be a deep truth in it . and that truth be , or be , in the 20th century , that while we be begin to develop endanger species movement ,    we do not have an endangered people 's movement . we have holocaust education in the school . most of we be groom not only on image of nuclear catastrophe , but also on image and knowledge of the holocaust . there be a museum , of course , on the mall in washington , right next to lincoln and jefferson . I mean , we have own never again culturally , appropriately , interestingly . and yet the politicization of never again , the operationalization of never again , have never occur in the 20th century .     and that be what that moment with patricia schroeder I think show : that if we be to bring about an end to the world 's bad atrocity , we have to make it such . there have to be a role — there have to be the creation of political noise and political cost in response to massive crime against humanity , and so forth . so that be the 20th century .     now here — and this will be a relief to you at this point in the afternoon — there be good news , amazing news , in the 21st century , and that be that , almost out of nowhere , there have come into be an anti - genocide movement , an anti - genocide constituency , and one that looks destine , in fact , to be permanent . it grow up in response to the atrocity in darfur . it be comprise of student . there be something like 300 anti - genocide chapter on college campus around the country . it be big than the anti - apartheid movement . there be something like 500 high school chapter devote to stop the genocide in darfur . evangelical have join it . jewish group have join it . " hotel rwanda " watcher have join it . it be a cacophonous movement .     to call it a movement , as with all movement , perhaps , be a little misleading . it be diverse . it be get a lot of different approach . it be get all the up and the down of movement . but it have be amazingly successful in one regard , in that it have become , it have congeal into this endangered people 's movement that be miss in the 20th century . it see itself , such as it be , the it , as something that will create the impression that there will be political cost , there will be a political price to be pay , for allow genocide , for not have an heroic imagination , for not be an upstander but for be , in fact , a bystander .     now because it be student - drive , there be some amazing thing that the movement have do . they have launch a divestment campaign that have now convince , I think , 55 university in 22 state to divest their holding of stock with regard to company do business in sudan . they have a 1 - 800 - genocide number — this be go to sound very kitsch , but for those of you who may not be , I mean , may be apolitical , but interested in do something about genocide , you dial 1 - 800 - genocide and you type in your zip code , and you do not even have to know who your congressperson be . it will refer you directly to your congressperson , to your u.s . senator , to your governor where divestment legislation be pende . they 've lower the transaction cost of stop genocide . I think the most innovative thing they 've introduce recently be genocide grade . and it take student to introduce genocide grade . so what you now have when a congress be in session be member of congress call up these 19 - year - old or 24 - year - old and say , I be just tell I have a d minus on genocide ; what do I do to get a c ? I just want to get a c. help I . and the student and the other who be part of this incredibly energized base be there to answer that , and there be always something to do .     now , what this movement have do be it have extract from the bush administration from the united states , at a time of massive over - stretch — military , financial , diplomatic — a whole series of commitment to darfur that no other country in the world be make . for instance , the referral of the crime in darfur to the international criminal court , which the bush administration do not like . the expenditure of 3 billion dollar in refugee camp to try to keep , basically , the people who 've be displace from their home by the sudanese government , by the so - call janjaweed , the militia , to keep those people alive until something more durable can be achieve . and recently , or now not that recently , about six month ago , the authorization of a peacekeeping force of 26,000 that will go .     and that be all the bush administration 's leadership , and it be all because of this bottom - up pressure and the fact that the phone have not stop ring from the beginning of this crisis . the bad news , however , to this question of will evil prevail , be that evil live on . the people in those camp be surround on all side by so - call janjaweed , these man on horseback with spear and kalashnikovs . woman who go to get firewood in order to heat the humanitarian aid in order to feed their family — humanitarian aid , the dirty secret of it be it have to be heat , really , to be edible — be themselves subject to rape , which be a tool of the genocide that be be use . and the peacekeeper I 've mention , the force have be authorize , but almost no country on earth have step forward since the authorization to actually put its troop or its police in harm 's way .     so we have achieve an awful lot relative to the 20th century , and yet far too little relative to the gravity of the crime that be unfold as we sit here , as we speak . why the limit to the movement ? why be what have be achieve , or what the movement have do , be necessary but not sufficient to the crime ? I think there be a couple — there be many reason — but a couple just to focus on briefly .     the first be that the movement , such as it be ,   stop at america 's border .   it be not a global movement .    it do not have too many compatriot abroad who themselves be ask their government to do more to stop genocide . and the holocaust culture that we have in this country make american , sort of , more prone to , I think , want to bring never again to life . the guilt that the clinton administration express , that bill clinton express over rwanda , create a space in our society for a consensus that rwanda be bad and wrong and we wish we have do more , and that be something that the movement have take advantage of . european government , for the most part , have not acknowledge responsibility , and there be nothing to kind of to push back and up against .     so this movement , if it be to be durable and global , will have to cross border , and you will have to see other citizen in democracy , not simply rest on the assumption that their government would do something in the face of genocide , but actually make it such . government will never gravitate towards crime of this magnitude naturally or eagerly . as we see , they have not even gravitate towards protect our port or reign in loose nuke . why would we expect in a bureaucracy that it would orient itself towards distant suffering ? so one reason be it have not go global .     the second be , of course , that at this time in particular in america 's history , we have a credibility problem , a legitimacy problem in international institution . it be structurally really , really hard to do , as the bush administration rightly do , which be to denounce genocide on a monday and then describe water boarding on a tuesday as a no - brainer and then turn up on wednesday and look for troop commitment . now , other country have their own reason for not want to get involve . let I be clear . they be in some way use the bush administration as an alibi . but it be essential for we to be a leader in this sphere , of course to restore our standing and our leadership in the world . the recovery be go to take some time .     we have to ask ourselves , what now ? what do we do go forward as a country and as citizen in relationship to the world 's bad place , the world 's bad suffering , killer , and the kind of killer that could come home to roost sometime in the future ? the place that I turn to answer that question be to a man that many of you may not have ever hear of , and that be a brazilian name sergio vieira de mello who , as chris say , be blow up in iraq in 2003 . he be the victim of the first - ever suicide bomb in iraq . it be hard to remember , but there be actually a time in the summer of 2003 , even after the u.s . invasion , where , apart from looting , civilian be relatively safe in iraq .     now , who be sergio ? sergio vieira de mello be his name . in addition to be brazilian , he be describe to I before I meet he in 1994 as someone who be a cross between james bond on the one hand and bobby kennedy on the other . and in the u.n . , you do not get that many people who actually manage to merge those quality . he be james bond - like in that he be ingenious . he be draw to the flame , he chase the flame , he be like a moth to the flame . something of an adrenalin junkie . he be successful with woman . he be bobby kennedy - like because in some way one could never tell if he be a realist masquerade as an idealist or an idealist masquerade as a realist , as people always wonder about bobby kennedy and john kennedy in that way .     what he be be a decathlete of nation - building , of problem - solve , of troubleshoot in the world 's bad place and in the world 's most break place . in fail state , genocidal state , under - govern state , precisely the kind of place that threat to this country exist on the horizon , and precisely the kind of place where most of the world 's suffering tend to get concentrated . these be the place he be draw to . he move with the headline . he be in the u.n . for 34 year . he join at the age of 21 . start off when the cause in the war du jour in the ' 70 be war of independence and decolonization . he be there in bangladesh deal with the outflow of million of refugee — the large refugee flow in history up to that point . he be in sudan when the civil war break out there . he be in cyprus right after the turkish invasion . he be in mozambique for the war of independence . he be in lebanon . amazingly , he be in lebanon — the u.n . base be use — palestinians stage attack out from behind the u.n . base . israel then invade and overrun the u.n . base .     sergio be in beirut when the u.s . embassy be hit by the first - ever suicide attack against the united states .    people date the beginning of this new era to 9/11 , but surely 1983 , with the attack on the us embassy and the marine barrack — which sergio witness — those be , in fact , in some way , the dawning of the era that we find ourselves in today . from lebanon he go to bosnia in the ' 90 . the issue be , of course , ethnic sectarian violence . he be the first person to negotiate with the khmer rouge . talk about evil prevail . I mean , here he be in the room with the embodiment of evil in cambodia . he negotiate with the serb . he actually cross so far into this realm of talk to evil and try to convince evil that it do not need to prevail that he earn the nickname — not sergio but serbio while he be live in the balkan and conduct these kind of negotiation .     he then go to rwanda and to congo in the aftermath of the genocide , and he be the guy who have to decide — huh , ok , the genocide be over ; 800,000 people have be kill ; the people responsible be flee into neighboring country — into congo , into tanzania . I be sergio , I be a humanitarian , and I want to feed those — well , I do not want to feed the killer but I want to feed the two million people who be with they , so we be go to go , we be go to set up camp , and we be go to supply humanitarian aid . but , uh - oh , the killer be within the camp . well , I would like to separate the sheep from the wolf . let I go door - to - door to the international community and see if anybody will give I police or troop to do the separation . and their response , of course , be no more than we want to stop the genocide and put our troop in harm 's way to do that , nor do we now want to get in the way and pluck genocidaire from camp .     so then you have to make the decision . do you turn off the international spigot of life support and risk two million civilian life ? or do you continue feed the civilian , know that the genocidaire be in the camp , literally sharpen their knife for future battle ? what do you do ? it be all less - evil terrain in these broken place .     late ' 90s : nation - building be the cause du jour . he be the guy put in charge . he be the paul bremer or the jerry bremer of first kosovo and then east timor . he govern the place . he be the viceroy . he have to decide on tax policy , on currency , on border patrol , on police . he have to make all these judgment . he be a brazilian in these place . he speak seven language . he be be up to that point in 14 war zone so he be position to make well judgment , perhaps , than people who have never do that kind of work . but nonetheless , he be the cut edge of our experimentation with do good with very few resource be bring to bear in , again , the world 's bad place .     and then after timor , 9/11 have happen , he be name u.n . human right commissioner , and he have to balance liberty and security and figure out , what do you do when the most powerful country in the united nations be bow out of the geneva convention , bow out of international law ? do you denounce ? well , if you denounce , you be probably never go to get back in the room . maybe you stay reticent . maybe you try to charm president bush — and that be what he do . and in so do he earn himself , unfortunately , his final and tragic appointment to iraq — the one that result in his death .     one note on his death , which be so devastating , be that despite predicate the war on iraq on a link between saddam hussein and terrorism in 9/11 , believe it or not , the bush administration or the invader do no planning , no pre - war planning , to respond to terrorism . so sergio — this receptacle of all of this learning on how to deal with evil and how to deal with brokenness , lie under the rubble for three and a half hour without rescue . stateless . the guy who try to help the stateless people his whole career . like a refugee . because he represent the u.n .     if you represent everyone , in some way you represent no one . you be un - own . and what the american — the most powerful military in the history of mankind be able to muster for his rescue , believe it or not , be literally these heroic two american soldier go into the shaft . building be shake . one of they have be at 9/11 and lose his buddy on september 11th , and yet go in and risk his life in order to save sergio . but all they have be a woman 's handbag — literally one of those basket handbag — and they tie it to a curtain rope from one of the office at u.n . headquarters , and create a pulley system into this shaft in this quivering building in the interest of rescue this person , the person we most need to turn to now , this shepherd , at a time when so many of we feel like we be lack guidance .     and this be the pulley system . this be what we be able to muster for sergio . the good news , for what it be worth , be after sergio and 21 other be kill that day in the attack on the u.n . , the military create a search and rescue unit that have the cutting equipment , the shoring wood , the crane , the thing that you would have need to do the rescue . but it be too late for sergio .     I want to wrap up , but I want to close with what I take to be the four lesson from sergio 's life on this question of how do we prevent evil from prevail , which be how I would have frame the question . here be this guy who get a 34 - year head start think about the kind of question we as a country be grapple with , we as citizen be grapple with now . what do we take away ?     first , I think , be his relationship to , in fact , evil be something to learn from . he , over the course of his career , change a great deal . he have a lot of flaw , but he be very adaptive . I think that be his great quality . he start as somebody who would denounce harmdoer , he would charge up to people who be violate international law , and he would say , you be violate , this be the u.n . charter . do not you see it be unacceptable what you be do ? and they would laugh at he because he do not have the power of state , the power of any military or police . he just have the rule , he have the norm , and he try to use they . and in lebanon , southern lebanon in ' 82 , he say to himself and to everybody else , I will never use the word " unacceptable " again . I will never use it . I will try to make it such , but I will never use that word again . but he lunge in the opposite direction . he start , as I mention , to get in the room with evil , to not denounce , and become almost obsequious when he win the nickname serbio , for instance , and even when he negotiate with the khmer rouge would black - box what have occur prior to enter the room .     but by the end of his life , I think he have strike a balance that we as a country can learn from . be in the room , do not be afraid of talk to your adversary , but do not bracket what happen before you enter the room . do not black - box history . do not check your principle at the door . and I think that be something that we have to be in the room , whether it be nixon go to china or khrushchev and kennedy or reagan and gorbachev . all the great progress in this country with relation to our adversary have come by go into the room . and it do not have to be an act of weakness . you can actually do far more to build an international coalition against a harmdoer or a wrongdoer by be in the room and show to the rest of the world that that person , that regime , be the problem and that you , the united states , be not the problem .     second take - away from sergio 's life , briefly . what I take away , and this in some way be the most important , he espouse and exhibit a reverence for dignity that be really , really unusual . at a micro level , the individual around he be visible . he see they . at a macro level , he think , you know , we talk about democracy promotion , but we do it in a way sometimes that be an affront to people 's dignity . we put people on humanitarian aid and we boast about it because we 've spend three billion . it be incredibly important , those people would no long be alive if the united states , for instance , have not spend that money in darfur , but it be not a way to live . if we think about dignity in our conduct as citizen and as individual with relation to the people around we , and as a country , if we could inject a regard for dignity into our dealing with other country , it would be something of a revolution .     third point , very briefly . he talk a lot about freedom from fear . and I recognize there be so much to be afraid of . there be so many genuine threat in the world . but what sergio be talk about be , let us calibrate our relationship to the threat . let us not hype the threat ; let us actually see it clearly . we have reason to be afraid of melt ice cap . we have reason to be afraid that we have not secure loose nuclear material in the former soviet union . let us focus on what be the legitimate challenge and threat , but not lunge into bad decision because of a panic , of a fear . in time of fear , for instance , one of the thing sergio use to say be , fear be a bad advisor . we lunge towards the extreme when we be not operate and try to , again , calibrate our relationship to the world around we .     fourth and final point : he somehow , because he be work in all the world 's bad place and all less evil , have a humility , of course , and an awareness of the complexity of the world around he . I mean , such an acute awareness of how hard it be . how sisyphean this task be of mending , and yet aware of that complexity ,    humble by it , he be not paralyze by it . and we as citizen , as we go through this experience of the kind of , the crisis of confidence , crisis of competence , crisis of legitimacy , I think there be a temptation to pull back from the world and say , ah , katrina , iraq — we do not know what we be do . we can not afford to pull back from the world . it be a question of how to be in the world .     and the lesson , I think , of the anti - genocide movement that I mention , that be a partial success but by no means have it achieve what it have set out to do — it 'll be many decade , probably , before that happen — but be that if we want to see change , we have to become the change . we can not rely upon our institution to do the work of necessarily talk to adversary on their own without we create a space for that to happen , for have respect for dignity , and for bring that combination of humility and a sort of emboldened sense of responsibility to our dealing with the rest of the world . so will evil prevail ? be that the question ? I think the short answer be : no , not unless we let it .     thank you . ( applause )  
   so I understand that this meeting be plan , and the slogan be from be to still . and I be illustrate still . which , of course , I be not agree with because ,   although I be 94 , I be not still work . and anybody who ask I , " be you still do this or that ? " I do not answer because I be not do thing still , I be do it like I always do . I still have — or do I use the word still ? I do not mean that .     ( laughter )     I have my file which be call to do . I have my plan . I have my client . I be do my work like I always do . so this take care of my age . I want to show you my work so you know what I be do and why I be here . this be about 1925 . all of these thing be make during the last 75 year .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     but , of course , I be work since 25 , do more or less what you see here . this be castleton china . this be an exhibition at the museum of modern art . this be now for sale at the metropolitan museum . this be still at the metropolitan museum now for sale . this be a portrait of my daughter and myself .     ( applause )     these be just some of the thing I 've make . I make hundred of they for the last 75 year . I call myself a maker of thing . I do not call myself an industrial designer because I be other thing . industrial designer want to make novel thing . novelty be a concept of commerce , not an aesthetic concept . the industrial design magazine , I believe , be call " innovation . " innovation be not part of the aim of my work . well , maker of thing : they make thing more beautiful , more elegant , more comfortable than just the craftsman do . I have so much to say . I have to think what I be go to say . well , to describe our profession otherwise , we be actually concerned with the playful search for beauty . that mean the playful search for beauty be call the first activity of man . sarah smith , who be a mathematic professor at mit , write , " the playful search for beauty be man 's first activity — that all useful quality and all material quality be develop from the playful search for beauty . " these be tile . the word , " playful " be a necessary aspect of our work because , actually , one of our problem be that we have to make , produce , lovely thing throughout all of life , and this for I be now 75 year .     so how can you , without dry up , make thing with the same pleasure , as a gift to other , for so long ? the playful be therefore an important part of our quality as designer . let I tell you some about my life . as I say , I start to do these thing 75 year ago . my first exhibition in the united states be at the sesquicentennial exhibition in 1926 — that the hungarian government send one of my hand - draw piece as part of the exhibit . my work actually take I through many country , and show I a great part of the world . this be not that they take I — the work do not take I — I make the thing particularly because I want to use they to see the world . I be incredibly curious to see the world , and I make all these thing , which then finally do take I to see many country and many culture . I start as an apprentice to a hungarian craftsman , and this teach I what the guild system be in middle age .     the guild system : that mean when I be an apprentice , I have to apprentice myself in order to become a pottery master . in my shop where I study , or learn , there be a traditional hierarchy of master , journeyman and learn worker , and apprentice , and I work as the apprentice . the work as an apprentice be very primitive . that mean I have to actually learn every aspect of make pottery by hand . we mash the clay with our foot when it come from the hillside . after that , it have to be knead . it have to then go in , kind of , a mangle . and then finally it be prepare for the throwing . and there I really work as an apprentice . my master take I to set oven because this be part of oven - making , oven - setting , in the time . and finally , I have receive a document that I have accomplish my apprenticeship successfully , that I have behave morally , and this document be give to I by the guild of roof - coverer , rail - digger , oven - setter , chimney sweep and potter .     ( laughter )     I also get at the time a workbook which explain my right and my working condition , and I still have that workbook . first I set up a shop in my own garden , and make pottery which I sell on the marketplace in budap . and there I be sit , and my then - boyfriend — I do not mean it be a boyfriend like it be mean today — but my boyfriend and I sit at the market and sell the pot . my mother think that this be not very proper , so she sit with we to add propriety to this activity .     ( laughter )     however , after a while there be a new factory be build in budap , a pottery factory , a large one . and I visit it with several lady , and ask all sort of question of the director . then the director ask I , why do you ask all these question ? I say , I also have a pottery . so he ask I , could he please visit I , and then finally he do , and explain to I that what I do now in my shop be an anachronism , that the industrial revolution have break out , and that I rather should join the factory . there he make an art department for I where I work for several month . however , everybody in the factory spend his time at the art department . the director there say there be several woman cast and produce my design now in mold , and this be sell also to america .     I remember that it be quite successful . however , the director , the chemist , model maker — everybody — concern himself much more with the art department — that mean , with my work — than make toilet , so finally they get a letter from the center , from the bank who own the factory , say , make toilet - setting behind the art department , and that be my end . so this give I the possibility because now I be a journeyman , and journeyman also take their satchel and go to see the world . so as a journeyman , I put an ad into the paper that I have study , that I be a down - to - earth potter 's journeyman and I be look for a job as a journeyman . and I get several answer , and I accept the one which be farth from home and practically , I think , halfway to america .     and that be in hamburg . then I first take this job in hamburg , at an art pottery where everything be do on the wheel , and so I work in a shop where there be several potter . and the first day , I be come to take my place at the turntable — there be three or four turntable — and one of they , behind where I be sit , be a hunchback , a deaf - mute hunchback , who smell very bad . so I douse he in cologne every day , which he think be very nice , and therefore he bring bread and butter every day , which I have to eat out of courtesy . the first day I come to work in this shop there be on my wheel a surprise for I . my colleague have thoughtfully put on the wheel where I be suppose to work a very nicely model natural man 's organ . ( laughter ) after I brush they off with a hand motion , they be very — I finally be now accept , and work there for some six month . this be my first job . if I go on like this , you will be here till midnight .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     so I will try speed it up a little     ( laughter )     moderator : eva , we have about five minute .     ( laughter )     eva zeisel : be you sure ?     moderator : yes , I be sure .     ez : well , if you be sure , I have to tell you that within five minute I will talk very fast . and actually , my work take I to many country because I use my work to fill my curiosity . and among other thing , other country I work , be in the soviet union , where I work from ' 32 to ' 37 — actually , to ' 36 . I be finally there , although I have nothing to do — I be a foreign expert . I become art director of the china and glass industry , and eventually under stalin 's purge — at the beginning of stalin 's purge , I do not know that hundred of thousand of innocent people be arrest . so I be arrest quite early in stalin 's purge , and spend 16 month in a russian prison . the accusation be that I have successfully prepare an attentat on stalin 's life . this be a very dangerous accusation . and if this be the end of my five minute , I want to tell you that I actually do survive , which be a surprise . but since I survive and I be here , and since this be the end of the five minute , I will —     moderator : tell I when your last trip to russia be . be not you there recently ?     ez : oh , this summer , in fact , the lomonosov factory be buy by an american company , invite I . they find out that I have work in ' 33 at this factory , and they come to my studio in rockland county , and bring the 15 of their artist to visit I here . and they invite myself to come to the russian factory last summer , in july , to make some dish , design some dish . and since I do not like to travel alone , they also invite my daughter , son - in - law and granddaughter , so we have a lovely trip to see russia today , which be not a very pleasant and happy view . here I be now , if this be the end ? thank you .     ( applause )  
   the career that I start early on in my life be look for exotic life form in exotic place , and at that time I be work in the antarctic and the arctic , and high desert and low desert . until about a dozen year ago , when I be really capture by cave , and I really re - focused most of my research in that direction .     so I have a really cool day job — I get to do some really amazing stuff . I work in some of the most extreme cave environment on the planet . many of they be try to kill we from the minute we go into they , but nevertheless , they be absolutely gripping , and contain unbelievable biological wonder that be very , very different from those that we have on the planet . apart from the intrinsic value of the biology and mineralogy and geo - microbiology that we do there , we be also use these as template for figure out how to go look for life on other planet . particularly mar , but also europa , the small , icy moon around jupiter . and perhaps , someday , far beyond our solar system itself .     I be very passionately interested in the human future , on the moon and mar particularly , and elsewhere in the solar system . I think it be time that we transition to a solar system - go civilization and specie . and , as an outgrowth of all of this then , I wonder about whether we can , and whether we even should , think about transport earth - type life to other planet . notably mar , as a first example .     something I never talk about in scientific meeting be how I actually get to this state and why I do the work that I do . why do not I have a normal job , a sensible job ? and then of course , I blame the soviet union . because in the mid-1950 , when I be a tiny child , they have the audacity to launch a very primitive little satellite call sputnik , which send the western world into a hysterical tailspin . and a tremendous amount of money go into the funding of science and mathematic skill for kid . and I be a product of that generation , like so many other of my peer . it really catch hold of we , and catch fire , and it would be lovely if we could reproduce that again now .     of course , refuse to grow up — — even though I impersonate a grown - up in daily life , but I do a fairly good job of that — but really retain that childlike quality of not care what other people think about what you be interested in , be really critical . the next element be the fact that I have apply a value judgment and my value judgment be that the presence of life be well than no life . and so , life be more valuable than no life . and so I think that that hold together a great deal of the work that people in this audience approach .     I be very interested in mar , of course , and that be a product of my be a young undergraduate when the vike lander land on mar . and that take what have be a tiny little astronomical object in the sky , that you would see as a dot , and turn it completely into a landscape , as that very first primitive picture came rastere across the screen . and when it become a landscape , it also become a destination , and alter , really , the course of my life .     in my graduate year I work with my colleague and mentor and friend , steve schneider , at the national center for atmospheric research , work on global change issue . we 've write a number of thing on the role of gaia hypothesis — whether or not you could consider earth as a single entity in any meaningful scientific sense , and then , as an outgrowth of that , I work on the environmental consequence of nuclear war .     so , wonderful thing and grim thing . but what it teach I be to look at earth as a planet with external eye , not just as our home . and that be a wonderful stepping away in perspective , to try to then think about the way our planet behave , as a planet , and with the life that be on it . and all of this seem to I to be a salient point in history . we be get ready to begin to go through the process of leave our planet of origin and out into the wide solar system and beyond .     so , back to mar . how hard be it go to be to find life on mar ? well , sometimes it be really very hard for we to find each other , even on this planet . so , find life on another planet be a non - trivial occupation and we spend a lot of time try to think about that . whether or not you think it be likely to be successful sort of depend on what you think about the chance of life in the universe . I think , myself , that life be a natural outgrowth of the increase complexification of matter over time .     so , you start with the big bang and you get hydrogen , and then you get helium , and then you get more complicated stuff , and you get planet form — and life be a common , planetary - base phenomenon , in my view . certainly , in the last 15 year , we 've see increase number of planet outside of our solar system be confirm , and just last month , a couple of week ago , a planet in the size - class of earth have actually be find . and so this be very exciting news .     so , my first bold prediction be that , be that in the universe , life be go to be everywhere . it be go to be everywhere we look — where there be planetary system that can possibly support it . and those planetary system be go to be very common . so , what about life on mar ? well , if somebody have ask I about a dozen year ago what I think the chance of life on mar would be , I would 've probably say , a couple of percent . and even that be consider outrageous at the time . I be once sneeringly introduce by a former nasa official , as the only person on the planet who still think there be life on mar . of course , that official be now dead , and I be not , so there be a certain amount of glory in outlive your adversary .     but thing have change greatly over the last dozen year . and the reason that they have change be because we now have new information . the amazing pathfinder mission that go in ' 97 , and the mer rover mission that be on mar as we speak now and the european space agency 's mars express , have teach we a number of amazing thing . there be sub - surface ice on that planet . and so where there be water , there be a very high chance of our kind of life . there be clearly sedimentary rock all over the place – one of the lander be sit in the middle of an ancient seabed , and there be these amazing structure call blueberry , which be these little , rocky concretion that we be busy make biologically in my lab right now .     so , with all of these thing put together , I think that the chance of life be much great than I would 've ever think . I think that the chance of life having arise on mar , sometime in its past , be maybe one in four to maybe even half and half . so this be a very bold statement . I think it be there , and I think we need to go look for it , and I think it be underground . so the game 's afoot , and this be the game that we play in astro - biology . how do you try to get a handle on extraterrestrial life ? how do you plan to look for it ? how do you know it when you find it ? because if it be big and obvious , we would 've already find it — it would 've already bite we on the foot , and it have not .     so , we know that it be probably quite cryptic . very critically , how do we protect it , if we find it , and not contaminate it ? and also , even perhaps more critically , because this be the only home planet we have , how do we protect we from it , while we study it ? so why might it be hard to find ? well , it be probably microscopic , and it be never easy to study microscopic thing , although the amazing tool that we now have to do that allow we to study thing in much great depth , at much small scale than ever before . but it be probably hide , because if you be out sequester resource from your environment , that make you yummy , and other thing might want to eat you , or consume you . and so , there be a game of predator - prey that be go to be , essentially , universal , really , in any kind of biological system . it also may be very , very different in its fundamental property – its chemistry , or its size .     we say small , but what do that mean ? be it virus - sized ? be it small than that ? be it big than the big bacterium ? we do not know . and speed of activity , which be something that we face in our work with sub - surface organism , because they grow very , very slowly . if I be to take a swab off your tooth and plate it on a petri plate , within about four or five hour , I would have to see growth . but the organism that we work with , from the sub - surface of earth , very often it be month — and in many case , year — before we see any growth whatsoever . so they be , intrinsically , a slow life - form .     but the real issue be that we be guide by our limited experience , and until we can think out of the box of our cranium and what we know , then we can not recognize what to look for , or how to plan for it . so , perspective be everything and , because of the history that I 've just briefly talk to you about , I have learn to think about earth as an extraterrestrial planet . and this have be invaluable in our approach to try to study these thing .     this be my favorite game on airplane : where you be in an airplane and you look out the window , you see the horizon . I always turn my head on the side , and that simple change make I go from see this planet as home , to see it as a planet . it be a very simple trick , and I never fail to do it when I be sit in a window seat . well , this be what we apply to our work . this show one of the most extreme cave that we work in . this be cueva de villa luz in tabasco , in mexico , and this cave be saturate with sulfuric acid . there be tremendous amount of hydrogen sulfide come into this cave from volcanic source and from the breakdown of evaporite — mineral below the carbonate in which this cave be form — and it be a completely hostile environment for we . we have to go in with protective suit and breathing gear , and 30 part per million of h2s will kill you . this be regularly several hundred part per million . so , it be a very hazardous environment , with co as well , and many other gas . these extreme physical and chemical parameter make the biology that grow in these place very special . because contrary to what you might think , this be not devoid of life .     this be one of the rich cave that we have find on the planet , anywhere . it be burst with life . the extreme on earth be interesting in their own right , but one of the reason that we be interested in they be because they represent , really , the average condition that we may expect on other planet . so , this be part of the ability that we have , to try to stretch our imagination , in term of what we may find in the future . there be so much life in this cave , and I can not even begin to scratch the surface of it with you .     but one of the most famous object out of this be what we call snottite , for obvious reason . this stuff look like what come out of your two - year - old 's nose when he have a cold . and this be produce by bacteria who be actually make more sulfuric acid , and live at phs right around zero . and so , this stuff be like battery acid . and yet , everything in this cave have adapt to it . in fact , there be so much energy available for biology in this cave , that there be actually a huge number of cavefish . and the local zoque indians harvest this twice a year , as part of their easter week celebration and holy week celebration .     this be very unusual for cave . in some of the other amazing cave that we work in — this be in lechuguilla cave in new mexico near carlsbad , and this be one of the most famous cave in the world . it be 115 mile of map passage , it be pristine , it have no natural opening and it be a gigantic biological , geo - microbiological laboratory . in this cave , great area be cover by this reddish material that you see here , and also these enormous crystal of selenite that you can see dangle down . this stuff be produce biologically . this be the breakdown product of the bedrock , that organism be busy munch their way through . they take iron and manganese mineral within the bedrock and they oxidize they . and every time they do that , they get a tiny little packet of energy . and that tiny little packet of energy be what they use , then , to run their life process . interestingly enough , they also do this with uranium and chromium , and various other toxic metal .     and so , the obvious avenue for bio - remediation come from organism like this . these organism we now bring into the lab , and you can see some of they grow on petri plate , and get they to reproduce the precise biomineral that we find on the wall of these cave . so , these be signal that they leave in the rock record . well , even in basalt surface in lava - tube cave , which be a by - product of volcanic activity , we find these wall totally cover , in many case , by these beautiful , glisten silver wall , or shiny pink or shiny red or shiny gold . and these be mineral deposit that be also make by bacteria . and you can see in these central image here , scan electron micrograph of some of these guy — these be garden of these bacteria .     one of the interesting thing about these particular guy be that they be in the actinomycete and streptomycete group of the bacteria , which be where we get most of our antibiotic . the sub - surface of earth contain a vast biodiversity . and these organism , because they be very separate from the surface , make a vast array of novel compound . and so , the potential for exploit this for pharmaceutical and industrial chemical use be completely untapped , but probably exceed most of the rest of the biodiversity of the planet .     so , lava - tube cave — I 've just tell you about organism that live here on this planet . we know that on mar and the moon there be ton of these structure . we can see they . on the left you can see a lava tube form at a recent eruption — mount etna in sicily — and this be the way these tube form . and when they hollow out , then they become habitat for organism . these be all over the planet mar , and we be busy catalogue they now . and so , there be very interesting cave real estate on mar , at least of that type .     in order to access these sub - surface environment that we be interested in , we be very interested in develop the tool to do this . you know , it be not easy to get into these cave . it require crawl , climbing , rope - work , technical rope - work and many other complex human motion in order to access these . we face the problem of , how can we do this robotically ? why would we want to do it robotically ? well , we be go to be send robotic mission to mar long in advance of human mission .     and then , secondly , get back to that early point that I make about the preciousness of any life that we may find on mar , we do not want to contaminate it . and one of the good way to study something without contaminate it be to have an intermediary . and in this case , we be imagine intermediary robotic device that can actually do some of that front - end work for we , to protect any potential life that we find . I be not go to go through all of these project now , but we be involve in about half - a - dozen robotic development project , in collaboration with a number of different group . I want to talk specifically about the array that you see on the top .     these be hop microbot swarm . I be work on this with the field and space robotic laboratory and my friend steve dubowsky at mit , and we have come up with the idea of have little , jump bean - like robot that be propel by artificial muscle , which be one of the dubowsky lab 's specialty — be the epam , or artificial muscle . and these allow they to hop . they behave with a swarm behavior , where they relate to each other , model after insect swarm behavior , and they could be make very numerous . and so , one can send a thousand of they , as you can see in this upper left - hand picture , a thousand of they could fit into the payload bay that be use for one of the current mer rover . and these little guy — you could lose many of they . if you send a thousand of they , you could probably get rid of 90 percent of they and still have a mission . and so , that allow you the flexibility to go into very challenging terrain and actually make your way where you want to go .     now , to wrap this up , I want to talk for two second about cave and the human expansion beyond earth as a natural outgrowth of the work that we do in cave . it occur to we a number of year ago that cave have many property that people have use and other organism have use as habitat in the past . and perhaps it be time we start to explore those , in the context of future mar and the moon exploration .     so , we have just finish a nasa institute for advanced concept phase ii study , look at the irreducible set of technology that you would need in order to actually allow people to inhabit lava tube on the moon or mar . it turn out to be a fairly simple and small list , and we have go in the relatively primitive technology direction . so , we be talk about thing like inflatable liner that can conform to the complex topological shape on the inside of a cave , foam - in - place airlock to deal with this complex topology , various way of get breathing gas make from the intrinsic material of these body . and the future be there for we to use these lava - tube cave on mar . and right now we be in cave , and we be do science and recreation , but I think in the future we 'll be use they for habitat and science on these other body .     now , my view of what the current status of potential life on mar be that it be probably be on the planet , maybe one in two chance . the question as to whether there be life on mar that be relate to life on earth have now be very muddied , because we now know , from mar meteorite that have make it to earth , that there be material that can be exchange between those two planet .     one of the burn question , of course , be if we go there and find life in the sub - surface , as I fully expect that we will , be that a second genesis of life ? do life start here and be it transport there ? do it start there and get transport here ? this will be a fascinating puzzle as we go into the next half - century , and where I expect that we will have more and more mar mission to answer these question . thank you .  
   sheryl shade : hi , aimee . aimee mullins : hi .     ss : aimee and I think we would just talk a little bit , and I want she to tell all of you what make she a distinctive athlete .     am : well , for those of you who have see the picture in the little bio — it might have give it away — I be a double amputee , and I be bear without fibula in both leg .    I be amputate at age one , and I 've be run like hell ever since , all over the place .      ss : well , why do not you tell they how you get to georgetown — why do not we start there ? why do not we start there ?     am : I be a senior in georgetown in the foreign service program . I win a full academic scholarship out of high school . they pick three student out of the nation every year to get involve in international affair , and so I win a full ride to georgetown and I 've be there for four year . love it .     ss : when aimee get there , she decide that she be , kind of , curious about track and field , so she decide to call someone and start ask about it . so , why do not you tell that story ?     am : yeah . well , I guess I 've always be involve in sport . I play softball for five year grow up . I ski competitively throughout high school , and I get a little restless in college because I be not do anything for about a year or two sport - wise . and I would never compete on a disabled level , you know — I would always compete against other able - bodied athlete . that be all I would ever know . in fact , I would never even meet another amputee until I be 17 . and I hear that they do these track meet with all disabled runner , and I figure , " oh , I do not know about this , but before I judge it , let I go see what it be all about . " so , I book myself a flight to boston in ' 95 , 19 year old and definitely the dark horse candidate at this race . I have never do it before . I go out on a gravel track a couple of week before this meet to see how far I could run ,    and about 50 meter be enough for I , pant and heaving . and I have these leg that be make of a wood and plastic compound , attach with velcro strap — big , thick , five - ply wool sock on — you know , not the most comfortable thing , but all I would ever know .     and I be up there in boston against people wear leg make of all thing — carbon graphite and , you know , shock absorber in they and all sort of thing — and they be all look at I like , ok , we know who be not go to win this race . and , I mean , I go up there expect — I do not know what I be expect — but , you know , when I see a man who be miss an entire leg go up to the high jump , hop on one leg to the high jump and clear it at six foot , two inch ... dan o'brien jump 5'11 " in ' 96 in atlanta , I mean , if it just give you a comparison of — these be truly accomplish athlete , without qualify that word " athlete . " and so I decide to give this a shot : heart pound , I run my first race and I beat the national record - holder by three hundredth of a second , and become the new national record - holder on my first try out .     and , you know , people say , " aimee , you know , you 've get speed — you 've get natural speed — but you do not have any skill or finesse go down that track . you be all over the place . we all see how hard you be work . " and so I decide to call the track coach at georgetown . and I thank god I do not know just how huge this man be in the track and field world . he be coach five olympian , and the man 's office be line from floor to ceiling with all america certificate of all these athlete he be coach . he be just a rather intimidating figure . and I call he up and say , " listen , I run one race and I win ... "     ( laughter )     " I want to see if I can , you know — I need to just see if I can sit in on some of your practice , see what drill you do and whatever . " that be all I want — just two practice . " can I just sit in and see what you do ? " and he say , " well , we should meet first , before we decide anything . " you know , he be think , " what be I get myself into ? " so , I meet the man , walk in his office , and see these poster and magazine cover of people he have coach . and we get to talk , and it turn out to be a great partnership because he have never coach a disabled athlete , so therefore he have no preconceive notion of what I be or be not capable of , and I would never be coach before . so this be like , " here we go — let us start on this trip . "     so he start give I four day a week of his lunch break , his free time , and I would come up to the track and train with he . so that be how I meet frank . that be fall of ' 95 . but then , by the time that winter be roll around , he say , " you know , you be good enough . you can run on our woman 's track team here . " and I say , " no , come on . " and he say , " no , no , really . you can . you can run with our woman 's track team . " in the spring of 1996 , with my goal of make the u.s . paralympic team that may come up full speed , I join the woman 's track team . and no disabled person have ever do that — run at a collegiate level . so I do not know , it start to become an interesting mix .     ss : well , on your way to the olympics , a couple of memorable event happen at georgetown . why do not you just tell they ?   be : yes , well , you know , I would win everything as far as the disabled meet — everything I compete in — and , you know , training in georgetown and know that I be go to have to get use to    see the back of all these woman 's shirt — you know , I be run against the next flo - jo — and they be all look at I like , " hmm , what be , you know , what be go on here ? " and put on my georgetown uniform and go out there and know that , you know , in order to become well — and I be already the good in the country — you know , you have to train with people who be inherently well than you .     and I go out there and make it to the big east , which be sort of the championship race at the end of the season . it be really , really hot . and it be the first — I have just get these new sprinting leg that you see in that bio , and I do not realize at that time that the amount of sweating I would be do in the sock — it actually act like a lubricant and I would be , kind of , pistone in the socket . and at about 85 meter of my 100 meter sprint , in all my glory , I come out of my leg . like , I almost come out of it , in front of , like , 5,000 people . and I , I mean , be just mortified — because I be sign up for the 200 , you know , which go off in a half hour .     ( laughter )     I go to my coach : " please , do not make I do this . " I can not do this in front of all those people . my leg will come off . and if it come off at 85 there be no way I be go 200 meter . and he just sit there like this . my plea fall on deaf ear , thank god . because you know , the man be from brooklyn ; he be a big man . he say , " aimee , so what if your leg fall off ? you pick it up , you put the damn thing back on , and finish the goddamn race ! "     ( laughter ) ( applause ) and I do . so , he keep I in line . he keep I on the right track .     ss : so , then aimee make it to the 1996 paralympic , and she be all excited . her family 's come down — it be a big deal . it be now two year that you 've be run ?     am : no , a year .     ss : a year . and why do not you tell they what happen right before you go run your race ?     am : okay , well , atlanta . the paralympic , just for a little bit of clarification , be the olympic for people with physical disability — amputee , person with cerebral palsy , and wheelchair athlete — as oppose to the special olympic , which deal with people with mental disability . so , here we be , a week after the olympics and down at atlanta , and I be just blow away by the fact that just a year ago , I get out on a gravel track and could not run 50 meter . and so , here I be — never lose . I set new record at the u.s . national — the olympic trial — that may , and be sure that I be come home with the gold . I be also the only , what they call " bilateral bk " — below the knee . I be the only woman who would be do the long jump . I have just do the long jump , and a guy who be miss two leg come up to I and say , " how do you do that ? you know , we be suppose to have a planar foot , so we can not get off on the springboard . " I say , " well , I just do it . no one tell I that . "     so , it be funny — I be three inch within the world record — and keep on from that point , you know , so I be sign up in the long jump — sign up ? no , I make it for the long jump and the 100 - meter . and I be sure of it , you know ? I make the front page of my hometown paper that I deliver for six year , you know ? it be , like , this be my time for shine .    and we be at the trainee warm - up track , which be a few block away from the olympic stadium . these leg that I be on , which I 'll take out right now — I be the first person in the world on these leg . I be the guinea pig . , I be tell you , this be , like — talk about a tourist attraction .     everyone be take picture — " what be this girl run on ? " and I be always look around , like , where be my competition ? it be my first international meet . I try to get it out of anybody I could , you know , " who be I run against here ? " " oh , aimee , we 'll have to get back to you on that one . " I want to find out time . " do not worry , you be do great . " this be 20 minute before my race in the olympic stadium , and they post the heat sheet . and I go over and look . and my fast time , which be the world record , be 15.77 . then I be look : the next lane , lane two , be 12.8 . lane three be 12.5 . lane four be 12.2 . I say , " what be go on ? " and they shove we all into the shuttle bus , and all the woman there be miss a hand .     ( laughter )     so , I be just , like — they be all look at I like ' which one of these be not like the other , ' you know ? I be sit there , like , " oh , my god . oh , my god . " you know , I would never lose anything , like , whether it would be the scholarship or , you know , I would win five gold when I ski . in everything , I come in first . and georgetown — that be great . I be lose , but it be the good training because this be atlanta . here we be , like , crème de la crème , and there be no doubt about it , that I be go to lose big . and , you know , I be just think , " oh , my god , my whole family get in a van and drive down here from pennsylvania . " and , you know , I be the only female u.s . sprinter . so they call we out and , you know — " lady , you have one minute . " and I remember put my block in and just feel horrified because there be just this murmur come over the crowd , like , the one who be close enough to the start line to see . and I be like , " I know ! look ! this be not right . " and I be think that be my last card to play here ; if I be not go to beat these girl , I be go to mess their head a little , you know ?     ( laughter )      I mean , it be definitely the " rocky iv " sensation of I versus germany , and everyone else — estonia and poland — be in this heat . and the gun go off , and all I remember be finish last and fight back tear of frustration and incredible — incredible — this feeling of just be overwhelmed . and I have to think , " why do I do this ? " if I have win everything — but it be like , what be the point ? all this training — I have transform my life . I become a collegiate athlete , you know . I become an olympic athlete . and it make I really think about how the achievement be get there . I mean , the fact that I set my sight , just a year and three month before , on become an olympic athlete and say , " here be my life go in this direction — and I want to take it here for a while , and just see how far I could push it . "     and the fact that I ask for help — how many people jump on board ? how many people give of their time and their expertise , and their patience , to deal with I ? and that be this collective glory — that there be , you know , 50 people behind I that have join in this incredible experience of go to atlanta . so , I apply this sort of philosophy now to everything I do : sit back and realize the progression , how far you 've come at this day to this goal , you know . it be important to focus on a goal , I think , but also recognize the progression on the way there and how you 've grow as a person . that be the achievement , I think . that be the real achievement .     ss : why do not you show they your leg ?     am : oh , sure . ss : you know , show we more than one set of leg .     am : well , these be my pretty leg .     ( laughter )     no , these be my cosmetic leg , actually ,    and they be absolutely beautiful . you 've get to come up and see they . there be hair follicle on they , and I can paint my toenail . and , seriously , like , I can wear heel . like , you guy do not understand what that be like to be able to just go into a shoe store and buy whatever you want . ss : you got to pick your height ? be : I get to pick my height , exactly .      ( laughter )      patrick ewing , who play for georgetown in the ' 80 , come back every summer .    and I have incessant fun make fun of he in the training room because he would come in with foot injury . I be like , " get it off ! do not worry about it , you know . you can be eight foot tall . just take they off . "     ( laughter )     he do not find it as humorous as I do , anyway . ok , now , these be my sprinting leg , make of carbon graphite , like I say , and I 've get to make sure I 've get the right socket . no , I 've get so many leg in here . these be — do you want to hold that actually ? that be another leg I have for , like , tennis and softball . it have a shock absorber in it so it , like , " shhhh , " make this neat sound when you jump around on it . all right . and then this be the silicon sheath I roll over , to keep it on . which , when I sweat , you know , I be pistone out of it .     ss : be you a different height ?     am : in these ?     ss : in these .     am : I do not know . I do not think so . I may be a little tall . I actually can put both of they on .     ss : she can not really stand on these leg . she have to be move , so ...     am : yeah , I definitely have to be move , and balance be a little bit of an art in they . but without have the silicon sock , I be just go to try slip in it . and so , I run on these , and have shock half the world on these .     ( applause )     these be suppose to simulate the actual form of a sprinter when they run . if you ever watch a sprinter , the ball of their foot be the only thing that ever hit the track . so when I stand in these leg , my hamstring and my glute be contract , as they would be have I have foot and be stand on the ball of my foot .     ( audience : who make they ? )     am : it be a company in san diego call flex - foot . and I be a guinea pig , as I hope to continue to be in every new form of prosthetic limb that come out . but actually these , like I say , be still the actual prototype . I need to get some new one because the last meet I be at , they be everywhere . you know , it be like a big — it be come full circle .     moderator : aimee and the designer of they will be at tedme 2 , and we 'll talk about the design of they .     am : yes , we 'll do that .      ss : yes , there you go .     am : so , these be the sprint leg , and I can put my other ...     ss : can you tell about who design your other leg ?     am : yes . these I get in a place call bournemouth , england , about two hour south of london , and I be the only person in the united states with these , which be a crime because they be so beautiful . and I do not even mean , like , because of the toe and everything . for I , while I be such a serious athlete on the track , I want to be feminine off the track , and I think it be so important not to be limit in any capacity , whether it be , you know , your mobility or even fashion . I mean , I love the fact that I can go in anywhere and pick out what I want — the shoe I want , the skirt I want — and I be hope to try to bring these over here and make they accessible to a lot of people . they be also silicon . this be a really basic , basic prosthetic limb under here . it be like a barbie foot under this .     ( laughter )     it be . it be just stuck in this position , so I have to wear a two - inch heel . and , I mean , it be really — let I take this off so you can see it . I do not know how good you can see it , but , like , it really be . there be vein on the foot , and then my heel be pink , and my achille ' tendon — that move a little bit . and it be really an amazing store . I get they a year and two week ago . and this be just a silicon piece of skin . I mean , what happen be , two year ago this man in belgium be say , " god , if I can go to madame tussauds ' wax museum and see jerry hall replicate down to the color of her eye , look so real as if she breathe , why can not they build a limb for someone that look like a leg , or an arm , or a hand ? " I mean , they make ear for burn victim . they do amazing stuff with silicon .     ss : two week ago , aimee be up for the arthur ashe award at the espys . and she come into town and she rush around and she say , " I have to buy some new shoe ! " we be an hour before the espys , and she think she would get a two - inch heel but she would actually buy a three - inch heel .     am : and this pose a problem for I , because it mean I be walk like that all night long .     ss : for 45 minute . luckily , the hotel be terrific . they get someone to come in and see off the shoe .     ( laughter )     am : I say to the receptionist — I mean , I be just harry , and sheryl 's at my side — I say , " look , do you have anybody here who could help I ? because I have this problem ... " you know , at first they be just go to write I off , like , " if you do not like your shoe , sorry . it be too late . " " no , no , no , no . I 've get these special foot that need a two - inch heel . I have a three - inch heel . I need a little bit off . " they do not even want to go there . they do not even want to touch that one . they just do it . no , these leg be great . I be actually go back in a couple of week to get some improvement . I want to get leg like these make for flat foot so I can wear sneaker , because I can not with these one . so ... moderator : that be it .     ss : that be aimee mullins .     ( applause )  
   natalie macmaster : I be go to just quickly start out with a little bit of music here . ( applause )     ( music )     ( applause )     thank you ! ( applause )     I take my shoe off to dance , but maybe I 'll get at that later . anyways , I ... where to start ? well , I be really excited to talk a bit about my own upbringing in music and family and all of that , but I be even more excited for you people to hear about donnell 's amazing family and maybe even a little bit about how we meet , and all that sort of thing , but for those of you that may not be familiar with my upbringing , I be from cape breton island , nova scotia , eastern canada , which be a very , very musical island , and its origin come from scotland with the music and all the tradition , the dancing , the language , which unfortunately be die out in cape breton . the traditional language be gaelic , but a lot of the music come from the gaelic language , and the dancing and the singing and everything , and my bloodline be scottish through and through , but my mother and father be two very , very musical people .     my mom teach I to dance when I be five , and my dad teach I to play fiddle when I be nine . my uncle be a very well - know cape breton fiddler . his name 's buddy macmaster , and just a wonderful guy , and we have a great tradition at home call square dancing , and we have party , great party at our house and the neighbor ' house , and you talk about kitchen cèilidhs . well , cèilidh first of all be gaelic for party , but kitchen party in cape breton be very common , and basically somebody drop into the house , and no matter what house you go to in cape breton , there be a fiddle there , guarantee , and I would say , well there be first of all more fiddler per capita in cape breton than anywhere in the world , so ten chance to one , the fellow who walk in the door could play it , so you would have someone come into the house , you would invite they to play a tune , and lo and behold a little party would start up and somebody would dance , and somebody would sing , and all that sort of thing , so it be a wonderful , wonderful way to grow up , and that be where my beginning in music come from : my surrounding , my family , just my bloodline in itself , and , oh , I 've do lot of thing with my music .     I 've record lot of cd . I be nominate for a grammy and I 've win some award and stuff like that , so that be awesome , but the good part be meet my husband , and I 've actually know donnell for probably 12 year now , and I be go to get into a little bit of , I guess , how music bring we together , but I be go to introduce you right now to my new husband as of october 5 , donnell leahy . ( applause )     ( applause )     donnell leahy : thank you . I be kind of new to the ted experience and I be glad to be here , but I be just try to put it all together , try to figure all you people out , and I 've be here for a short while , and I be start to understand a little bit well . so I ask natalie , what do I do ? and she say , just talk about yourself .     it be kind of boring , but I 'll just tell you a little bit about my family . I be one of 11 brother and sister from lakefield , ontario , an hour and a half northeast of toronto , and we grow up on a farm . mom and dad raise beef cattle , and I be the old boy . there be four girl a little bit old than I . we grow up without a television . people find that strange , but I think it be a great blessing for we . we have a television for a few year , but of course we waste so much time and the work be not getting do , so out go the television .     we grow up play — mom be from cape breton , coincidentally . mom and natalie 's mother know each other . we grow up play , and use to dance together , right , yeah . ( laughter ) we grow up play a bunch of , we play by ear and I think that be important for we because we be not really expose to a lot of different style of music .     we learn to play the instrument , but we kind of have to come from within or go from within , because we do not watch television , we do not listen to a lot of radio . we go to church and to school sometimes , and farm and play music , so we be able , I think , at a very critical age to develop our own style , our own self , and my mother play , my father play , and the style that come from the ottawa valley in ontario , we call it french - canadian style but it originate in log camp . year ago , hundred of man would go up for the winter to the camp in northern ontario and in quebec , and they be all different culture , and the irish , the french , scottish , german , they would all meet , and of course at night , they would play card and step dance and play fiddle , and over the course of many year , the ottawa valley fiddle kind of evolve and the ottawa valley step dancing evolve , so that be , I kind of start out with that style and I quickly start do my own thing , and then I meet natalie , and I be expose to the great cape breton fiddling . that be how we meet . ( laughter ) you tell they . ( laughter )     nm : you want to or no ? ( laughter ) well I guess I have to now . well , it be just so interesting that donnell 's upbringing be very similar to mine , and I actually see donnell play when I be about 12 year old , and he and his family come to inverness , which be about 45 minute from where I live , and I be just blow away , like , it be just amazing , and you 'll find out why pretty soon here , but I could not believe the fiddling and mom be there with I , and she be say — donnell 's mother come up on stage and dance with her child , and mom be say , " that be julie macdonnell , I use to dance with she when we be kid . little do I think our child would be play instrument , you know , play music , yeah . "     twelve year , er , 20 year later little do she think her kid would be getting marry , but anyway , so , then I get a phone call about , I dunno , seven year later . I be 19 , first or second year of college , and it be donnell , and he say " hi , you probably do not know I but my name be donnell leahy . " and I say , " I know you . I have a tape of yours at home . " and he say , " well , I be in truro , " which be where I be , and he ask I out for supper . that be it . ( laughter ) ( applause ) then — will I keep go ? ( laugh ) ( laughter ) then we date for two year , break up for 10 , get back together and got marry . ( laughter ) ( applause )     dl : so anyway , we be run out of time , so I 'll just get to it . I be go to play a piece of music for you . it be actually a scottish piece I 've choose . I start out with a slow air . air be play in europe at burial , as a body be carry out from the wake site to the burial site , the procession be lead by a piper or a fiddle player . I 'll quickly play a short part of the air , and then I be go to get into kind of a crazy tune that be very difficult to play when you be not warm up , so , if I mess it up , pretend you like it anyway . it be call the bank .     ( tuning )     ( laughter )     ( music )     ( applause )     nm : well , we be going to play one together now . ( applause ) we be laugh , like , because our style be totally different , as you can hear . and so , you know , donnell and I be actually in the process of write new piece of music together that we can play , but we do not have any of those ready . we just start yesterday . ( laughter ) so we be going to play something together anyway .     dl : with one minute .     nm : with one minute .     ( audience reaction )     dl : you start . nm : no , you have to start , because you 've get to do your thing .     ( music )     nm : I be not tune . hold on .     ( tuning )     nm : I feel like I be in the duck or the bird pose right now . ( laughter )     ( music )     ( audience clap along )     ( applause )     announcer : great news , they be run late downstair . we 've get another 10 minute . ( applause )     nm : okay . sure . all right , okay . let us get she go . ( applause )     ( tuning )     dl : what do you want to play ?     nm : well , um ...     ( music ) ( laughter )     nm : uh , sure .     dl : how fast ?     nm : not too fast .     ( music )     ( audience clap along )     ( cheer )     ( audience clap along )     ( music )     ( applause )     dl : we be go to play a tune and natalie be go to accompany I on the piano . the cape breton piano playing be just awesome . it be very rhythmic and , you 'll see it . my mom play piano , and she learn to play before they have a piano at home in cape breton . before mom 's family have a piano in cape breton , she learn to play the rhythm on a piece of board , and the fiddler would all congregate to play on the cold winter 's evening and mom would be bang on this board , so when they buy a piano , they buy it in toronto and have it take by train and bring in on a horse , a horse and sleigh to the house . it become the only piano in the region , and mom say she could basically play as soon as the piano arrive , she could play it because she have learn all these rhythm . anyway , we find the piano last year and be able to bring it back home . we purchase it . it have go through , like , five or six family , and it be just a big thing for we , and we find actually an old picture of somebody and their family year ago . anyway , I be blabber on here .     nm : no , I want you to tell they about leahy .     dl : what about leahy ? ( laughter )     nm : just tell they what —     dl : she want I to talk about — we have a band name leahy . there be 11 sibling . we , um — what will I tell they ? ( laughter ) we open —     nm : no surgery .     dl : no surgery , oh yeah . we have a great opportunity . we open for shania twain for two year on her international tour . it be a big thing for we , and now all my sister be off have baby and the boy be all getting marry , so we be stay close to home for , I guess , another couple of week . what can I say ? I do not know what to say , natalie . we , uh ... ( laughter )     ( laughter )     nm : be this what marriage be about ? ( applause ) I like it . ( applause )     ( laughter )     dl : oh yeah , okay , in my family we have seven girl , four boy , we have two fiddle and one piano , and of course we be all fight to play on the instrument , so dad and mom set a rule that you could not kick anyone off the instrument . you have to wait until they be finish , so of course , what we would do be we would get on the piano and you would not even get off to eat , because you would not want to give it up to your brother or sister , and they would wait and wait and wait , and it would be midnight and you would be still sit there on the piano , but it be their way to get we to practice . will we play a tune ?     nm : it work . dl : it work . sorry , I hate to carry on ... so this be our last number , and we 'll feature nat on piano . okay , play in , how about a ?     ( music )     ( applause )  
   I be a writer . write book be my profession but it be more than that , of course . it be also my great lifelong love and fascination . and I do not expect that that be ever go to change . but , that say , something kind of peculiar have happen recently in my life and in my career , which have cause I to have to recalibrate my whole relationship with this work . and the peculiar thing be that I recently write this book , this memoir call " eat , pray , love " which , decidedly unlike any of my previous book , go out in the world for some reason , and become this big , mega - sensation , international bestseller thing . the result of which be that everywhere I go now , people treat I like I be doom . seriously — doom , doom ! like , they come up to I now , all worried , and they say , " be not you afraid you be never go to be able to top that ? be not you afraid you be go to keep write for your whole life and you be never again go to create a book that anybody in the world care about at all , ever again ? "     so that be reassuring , you know . but it would be bad , except for that I happen to remember that over 20 year ago , when I be a teenager , when I first start tell people that I want to be a writer , I be meet with this same sort of fear - base reaction . and people would say , " be not you afraid you be never go to have any success ? be not you afraid the humiliation of rejection will kill you ? be not you afraid that you be go to work your whole life at this craft and nothing be ever go to come of it and you be go to die on a scrap heap of break dream with your mouth fill with bitter ash of failure ? "     ( laughter )     like that , you know .     the answer — the short answer to all those question be , " yes . " yes , I be afraid of all those thing . and I always have be . and I be afraid of many , many more thing besides that people can not even guess at , like seaweed and other thing that be scary . but , when it come to writing , the thing that I 've be sort of think about lately , and wonder about lately , be why ? you know , be it rational ? be it logical that anybody should be expect to be afraid of the work that they feel they be put on this earth to do . and what be it specifically about creative venture that seem to make we really nervous about each other 's mental health in a way that other career kind of do not do , you know ? like my dad , for example , be a chemical engineer and I do not recall once in his 40 year of chemical engineering anybody ask he if he be afraid to be a chemical engineer , you know ? " that chemical - engineering block , john , how be it go ? " it just do not come up like that , you know ? but to be fair , chemical engineer as a group have not really earn a reputation over the century for be alcoholic manic - depressive .     ( laughter )     we writer , we kind of do have that reputation , and not just writer , but creative people across all genre , it seem , have this reputation for be enormously mentally unstable . and all you have to do be look at the very grim death count in the 20th century alone , of really magnificent creative mind who die young and often at their own hand , you know ? and even the one who do not literally commit suicide seem to be really undo by their gift , you know . norman mailer , just before he die , last interview , he say , " every one of my book have kill I a little more . " an extraordinary statement to make about your life 's work . but we do not even blink when we hear somebody say this , because we 've hear that kind of stuff for so long and somehow we 've completely internalize and accept collectively this notion that creativity and suffering be somehow inherently link and that artistry , in the end , will always ultimately lead to anguish .     and the question that I want to ask everybody here today be be you you all cool with that idea ? be you comfortable with that ? because you look at it even from an inch away and , you know — I be not at all comfortable with that assumption . I think it be odious . and I also think it be dangerous , and I do not want to see it perpetuate into the next century . I think it be well if we encourage our great creative mind to live .     and I definitely know that , in my case — in my situation — it would be very dangerous for I to start sort of leak down that dark path of assumption , particularly give the circumstance that I be in right now in my career . which be — you know , like check it out , I be pretty young , I be only about 40 year old . I still have maybe another four decade of work leave in I . and it be exceedingly likely that anything I write from this point forward be go to be judge by the world as the work that come after the freakish success of my last book , right ? I should just put it bluntly , because we be all sort of friend here now — it be exceedingly likely that my great success be behind I . so jesus , what a thought ! that be the kind of thought that could lead a person to start drink gin at nine o'clock in the morning , and I do not want to go there .     ( laughter )     I would prefer to keep do this work that I love .     and so , the question become , how ? and so , it seem to I , upon a lot of reflection , that the way that I have to work now , in order to continue write , be that I have to create some sort of protective psychological construct , right ? I have to sort of find some way to have a safe distance between I , as I be write , and my very natural anxiety about what the reaction to that writing be go to be , from now on . and , as I 've be look , over the last year , for model for how to do that , I 've be sort of look across time , and I 've be try to find other society to see if they might have have well and saner idea than we have about how to help creative people sort of manage the inherent emotional risk of creativity .     and that search have lead I to ancient greece and ancient rome . so stay with I , because it do circle around and back . but , ancient greece and ancient rome — people do not happen to believe that creativity come from human being back then , ok ? people believe that creativity be this divine attendant spirit that come to human being from some distant and unknowable source , for distant and unknowable reason . the greeks famously call these divine attendant spirit of creativity " daemon . " socrate , famously , believe that he have a daemon who speak wisdom to he from afar .     the romans have the same idea , but they call that sort of disembody creative spirit a genius . which be great , because the romans do not actually think that a genius be a particularly clever individual . they believe that a genius be this , sort of magical divine entity , who be believe to literally live in the wall of an artist 's studio , kind of like dobby the house elf , and who would come out and sort of invisibly assist the artist with their work and would shape the outcome of that work .     so brilliant — there it be , right there , that distance that I be talk about — that psychological construct to protect you from the result of your work . and everyone know that this be how it function , right ? so the ancient artist be protect from certain thing , like , for example , too much narcissism , right ? if your work be brilliant , you could not take all the credit for it , everybody know that you have this disembody genius who have help you . if your work bomb , not entirely your fault , you know ? everyone know your genius be kind of lame .     ( laughter )     and this be how people think about creativity in the west for a really long time . and then the renaissance come and everything change , and we have this big idea , and the big idea be , let us put the individual human be at the center of the universe above all god and mystery , and there be no more room for mystical creature who take dictation from the divine . and it be the beginning of rational humanism , and people start to believe that creativity come completely from the self of the individual . and for the first time in history , you start to hear people refer to this or that artist as be a genius , rather than have a genius .     and I get to tell you , I think that be a huge error . you know , I think that allow somebody , one mere person to believe that he or she be like , the vessel , you know , like the font and the essence and the source of all divine , creative , unknowable , eternal mystery be just a smidge too much responsibility to put on one fragile , human psyche . it be like ask somebody to swallow the sun . it just completely warps and distort ego , and it create all these unmanageable expectation about performance . and I think the pressure of that have be kill off our artist for the last 500 year .     and , if this be true , and I think it be true , the question become , what now ? can we do this differently ? maybe go back to some more ancient understanding about the relationship between human and the creative mystery . maybe not . maybe we can not just erase 500 year of rational humanistic thought in one 18 minute speech . and there be probably people in this audience who would raise really legitimate scientific suspicion about the notion of , basically , fairy who follow people around rub fairy juice on their project and stuff . I be not , probably , go to bring you all along with I on this .     but the question that I kind of want to pose be — you know , why not ? why not think about it this way ? because it make as much sense as anything else I have ever hear in term of explain the utter maddening capriciousness of the creative process . a process which , as anybody who have ever try to make something — which be to say basically everyone here — - know do not always behave rationally . and , in fact , can sometimes feel downright paranormal .     I have this encounter recently where I meet the extraordinary american poet ruth stone , who be now in her 90 , but she be be a poet her entire life and she tell I that when she be grow up in rural virginia , she would be out work in the field , and she say she would feel and hear a poem come at she from over the landscape . and she say it be like a thunderous train of air . and it would come barrel down at she over the landscape . and she feel it come , because it would shake the earth under her foot . she know that she have only one thing to do at that point , and that be to , in her word , " run like hell . " and she would run like hell to the house and she would be getting chase by this poem , and the whole deal be that she have to get to a piece of paper and a pencil fast enough so that when it thunder through she , she could collect it and grab it on the page . and other time she would not be fast enough , so she would be run and run , and she would not get to the house and the poem would barrel through she and she would miss it and she say it would continue on across the landscape , look , as she put it " for another poet . " and then there be these time — this be the piece I never forget — she say that there be moment where she would almost miss it , right ? so , she be run to the house and she be look for the paper and the poem pass through she , and she grab a pencil just as it be go through she , and then she say , it be like she would reach out with her other hand and she would catch it . she would catch the poem by its tail , and she would pull it backwards into her body as she be transcribe on the page . and in these instance , the poem would come up on the page perfect and intact but backwards , from the last word to the first .     ( laughter )     so when I hear that I be like — that be uncanny , that be exactly what my creative process be like .     ( laughter )     that be not at all what my creative process be — I be not the pipeline ! I be a mule , and the way that I have to work be I have to get up at the same time every day , and sweat and labor and barrel through it really awkwardly . but even I , in my mulishness , even I have brush up against that thing , at time . and I would imagine that a lot of you have too . you know , even I have have work or idea come through I from a source that I honestly can not identify . and what be that thing ? and how be we to relate to it in a way that will not make we lose our mind , but , in fact , might actually keep we sane ?     and for I , the good contemporary example that I have of how to do that be the musician tom wait , who I get to interview several year ago on a magazine assignment . and we be talk about this , and you know , tom , for most of his life , he be pretty much the embodiment of the tormented contemporary modern artist , try to control and manage and dominate these sort of uncontrollable creative impulse that be totally internalize .     but then he get old , he get calm , and one day he be drive down the freeway in los angeles , and this be when it all change for he . and he be speed along , and all of a sudden he hear this little fragment of melody , that come into his head as inspiration often come , elusive and tantalizing , and he want it , it be gorgeous , and he long for it , but he have no way to get it . he do not have a piece of paper , or a pencil , or a tape recorder .     so he start to feel all of that old anxiety start to rise in he like , " I be go to lose this thing , and I 'll be be haunt by this song forever . I be not good enough , and I can not do it . " and instead of panic , he just stop . he just stop that whole mental process and he do something completely novel . he just look up at the sky , and he say , " excuse I , can you not see that I be drive ? "     ( laughter )     " do I look like I can write down a song right now ? if you really want to exist , come back at a more opportune moment when I can take care of you . otherwise , go bother somebody else today . go bother leonard cohen . "     and his whole work process change after that . not the work , the work be still oftentime as dark as ever . but the process , and the heavy anxiety around it be release when he take the genie , the genius out of he where it be cause nothing but trouble , and release it back where it come from , and realize that this do not have to be this internalized , tormented thing . it could be this peculiar , wondrous , bizarre collaboration , kind of conversation between tom and the strange , external thing that be not quite tom .     when I hear that story , it start to shift a little bit the way that I work too , and this idea already save I once . it save I when I be in the middle of write " eat , pray , love , " and I fall into one of those sort of pit of despair that we all fall into when we be work on something and it be not come and you start to think this be go to be a disaster , the bad book ever write . not just bad , but the bad book ever write . and I start to think I should just dump this project . but then I remember tom talk to the open air and I try it . so I just lift my face up from the manuscript and I direct my comment to an empty corner of the room . and I say aloud , " listen you , thing , you and I both know that if this book be not brilliant that be not entirely my fault , right ? because you can see that I be put everything I have into this , I do not have any more than this . if you want it to be well , you 've get to show up and do your part of the deal . but if you do not do that , you know what , the hell with it . I be go to keep write anyway because that be my job . and I would please like the record to reflect today that I show up for my part of the job . "     ( laughter )     because —     ( applause )     because in the end it be like this , ok — century ago in the desert of north africa , people use to gather for these moonlight dance of sacred dance and music that would go on for hour and hour , until dawn . they be always magnificent , because the dancer be professional and they be terrific , right ? but every once in a while , very rarely , something would happen , and one of these performer would actually become transcendent . and I know you know what I be talk about , because I know you 've all see , at some point in your life , a performance like this . it be like time would stop , and the dancer would sort of step through some kind of portal and he be not do anything different than he have ever do , 1,000 night before , but everything would align . and all of a sudden , he would no long appear to be merely human . he would be light from within , and light from below and all light up on fire with divinity .     and when this happen , back then , people know it for what it be , you know , they call it by its name . they would put their hand together and they would start to chant , " allah , allah , allah , god , god , god . " that be god , you know . curious historical footnote : when the moor invade southern spain , they take this custom with they and the pronunciation change over the century from " allah , allah , allah , " to " olé , olé , olé , " which you still hear in bullfight and in flamenco dance . in spain , when a performer have do something impossible and magic , " allah , olé , olé , allah , magnificent , bravo , " incomprehensible , there it be — a glimpse of god . which be great , because we need that .     but , the tricky bit come the next morning , for the dancer himself , when he wake up and discover that it be tuesday at 11 a.m. , and he be no long a glimpse of god . he be just an age mortal with really bad knee , and maybe he be never go to ascend to that height again . and maybe nobody will ever chant god 's name again as he spin , and what be he then to do with the rest of his life ? this be hard . this be one of the most painful reconciliation to make in a creative life . but maybe it do not have to be quite so full of anguish if you never happen to believe , in the first place , that the most extraordinary aspect of your being come from you . but maybe if you just believe that they be on loan to you from some unimaginable source for some exquisite portion of your life to be pass along when you be finish , with somebody else . and , you know , if we think about it this way , it start to change everything .     this be how I 've start to think , and this be certainly how I 've be think in the last few month as I 've be work on the book that will soon be publish , as the dangerously , frighteningly over - anticipate follow up to my freakish success .     and what I have to sort of keep tell myself when I get really psyche out about that be do not be afraid . do not be daunt . just do your job . continue to show up for your piece of it , whatever that might be . if your job be to dance , do your dance . if the divine , cockeyed genius assign to your case decide to let some sort of wonderment be glimpse , for just one moment through your effort , then " olé ! " and if not , do your dance anyhow . and " olé ! " to you , nonetheless . I believe this and I feel that we must teach it . " olé ! " to you , nonetheless , just for have the sheer human love and stubbornness to keep show up .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     june cohen : olé !     ( applause )  
   fifty year ago , when I begin explore the ocean , no one — not jacques perrin , not jacques cousteau or rachel carson — imagine that we could do anything to harm the ocean by what we put into it or by what we take out of it . it seem , at that time , to be a sea of eden , but now we know , and now we be face paradise lose .     I want to share with you my personal view of change in the sea that affect all of we , and to consider why it matter that in 50 year , we 've lose — actually , we 've take , we 've eat — more than 90 percent of the big fish in the sea ; why you should care that nearly half of the coral reef have disappear ; why a mysterious depletion of oxygen in large area of the pacific should concern not only the creature that be die , but it really should concern you . it do concern you , as well .     I be haunt by the thought of what ray anderson call " tomorrow 's child , " ask why we do not do something on our watch to save shark and bluefin tuna and squid and coral reef and the living ocean while there still be time . well , now be that time . I hope for your help to explore and protect the wild ocean in way that will restore the health and , in so do , secure hope for humankind . health to the ocean mean health for we .     and I hope jill tarter 's wish to engage earthling include dolphin and whale and other sea creature in this quest to find intelligent life elsewhere in the universe . and I hope , jill , that someday we will find evidence that there be intelligent life among human on this planet .     ( laughter )     do I say that ? I guess I do .     for I , as a scientist , it all begin in 1953 when I first try scuba . it be when I first get to know fish swim in something other than lemon slice and butter . I actually love diving at night ; you see a lot of fish then that you do not see in the daytime . diving day and night be really easy for I in 1970 , when I lead a team of aquanaut live underwater for week at a time — at the same time that astronaut be put their footprint on the moon . in 1979 I have a chance to put my footprint on the ocean floor while use this personal submersible call jim . it be six mile offshore and 1,250 foot down . it be one of my favorite bathing suit .     since then , I 've use about 30 kind of submarine and I 've start three company and a nonprofit foundation call deep search to design and build system to access the deep sea . I lead a five - year national geographic expedition , the sustainable sea expedition , use these little sub . they be so simple to drive that even a scientist can do it . and I be live proof . astronaut and aquanaut alike really appreciate the importance of air , food , water , temperature — all the thing you need to stay alive in space or under the sea . I hear astronaut joe allen explain how he have to learn everything he could about his life support system and then do everything he could to take care of his life support system ; and then he point to this and he say , " life support system . " we need to learn everything we can about it and do everything we can to take care of it .     the poet auden say , " thousand have live without love ; none without water . " ninety - seven percent of earth 's water be ocean . no blue , no green . if you think the ocean be not important , imagine earth without it . mars come to mind . no ocean , no life support system . I give a talk not so long ago at the world bank and I show this amazing image of earth and I say , " there it be ! the world bank ! " that be where all the asset be ! and we 've be trawl they down much fast than the natural system can replenish they .     tim worth say the economy be a wholly - own subsidiary of the environment . with every drop of water you drink , every breath you take , you be connect to the sea . no matter where on earth you live . most of the oxygen in the atmosphere be generate by the sea . over time , most of the planet 's organic carbon have be absorb and store there , mostly by microbe . the ocean drive climate and weather , stabilize temperature , shape earth 's chemistry . water from the sea form cloud that return to the land and the sea as rain , sleet and snow , and provide home for about 97 percent of life in the world , maybe in the universe . no water , no life ; no blue , no green .     yet we have this idea , we human , that the earth — all of it : the ocean , the sky — be so vast and so resilient it do not matter what we do to it . that may have be true 10,000 year ago , and maybe even 1,000 year ago but in the last 100 , especially in the last 50 , we 've draw down the asset , the air , the water , the wildlife that make our life possible . new technology be help we to understand the nature of nature ; the nature of what be happen , show we our impact on the earth . I mean , first you have to know that you 've get a problem . and fortunately , in our time , we 've learn more about the problem than in all precede history . and with know come care . and with care , there be hope that we can find an endure place for ourselves within the natural system that support we . but first we have to know .     three year ago , I meet john hanke , who be the head of google earth , and I tell he how much I love be able to hold the world in my hand and go explore vicariously . but I ask he : " when be you go to finish it ? you do a great job with the land , the dirt . what about the water ? " since then , I 've have the great pleasure of work with the googler , with doer marine , with national geographic , with dozen of the good institution and scientist around the world , one that we could enlist , to put the ocean in google earth . and as of just this week , last monday , google earth be now whole .     consider this : start right here at the convention center , we can find the nearby aquarium , we can look at where we be sit , and then we can cruise up the coast to the big aquarium , the ocean , and california 's four national marine sanctuary , and the new network of state marine reserve that be begin to protect and restore some of the asset we can flit over to hawaii and see the real hawaiian island : not just the little bit that poke through the surface , but also what be below . to see — wait a minute , we can go kshhplash ! — right there , ha — under the ocean , see what the whale see . we can go explore the other side of the hawaiian island . we can go actually and swim around on google earth and visit with humpback whale . these be the gentle giant that I 've have the pleasure of meeting face to face many time underwater . there be nothing quite like be personally inspect by a whale .     we can pick up and fly to the deep place : seven mile down , the mariana trench , where only two people have ever be . imagine that . it be only seven mile , but only two people have be there , 49 year ago . one - way trip be easy . we need new deep - diving submarine . how about some x prize for ocean exploration ? we need to see deep trench , the undersea mountain , and understand life in the deep sea .     we can now go to the arctic . just ten year ago I stand on the ice at the north pole . an ice - free arctic ocean may happen in this century . that be bad news for the polar bear . that be bad news for we too . excess carbon dioxide be not only drive global warming , it be also change ocean chemistry , make the sea more acidic . that be bad news for coral reef and oxygen - produce plankton . also it be bad news for we . we be put hundred of million of ton of plastic and other trash into the sea . million of ton of discard fishing net , gear that continue to kill . we be clog the ocean , poison the planet 's circulatory system , and we be take out hundred of million of ton of wildlife , all carbon - base unit . barbarically , we be kill shark for shark fin soup , undermine food chain that shape planetary chemistry and drive the carbon cycle , the nitrogen cycle , the oxygen cycle , the water cycle — our life support system . we be still kill bluefin tuna ; truly endanger and much more valuable alive than dead . all of these part be part of our life support system . we kill use long line , with bait hook every few foot that may stretch for 50 mile or more . industrial trawler and dragger be scrape the sea floor like bulldozer , take everything in their path .     use google earth you can witness trawler — in china , the north sea , the gulf of mexico — shake the foundation of our life support system , leave plume of death in their path . the next time you dine on sushi — or sashimi , or swordfish steak , or shrimp cocktail , whatever wildlife you happen to enjoy from the ocean — think of the real cost . for every pound that go to market , more than 10 pound , even 100 pound , may be throw away as bycatch . this be the consequence of not know that there be limit to what we can take out of the sea . this chart show the decline in ocean wildlife from 1900 to 2000 . the high concentration be in red . in my lifetime , imagine , 90 percent of the big fish have be kill . most of the turtle , shark , tuna and whale be way down in number .     but , there be good news . ten percent of the big fish still remain . there be still some blue whale . there be still some krill in antarctica . there be a few oyster in chesapeake bay . half the coral reef be still in pretty good shape , a jeweled belt around the middle of the planet . there be still time , but not a lot , to turn thing around . but business as usual mean that in 50 year , there may be no coral reef — and no commercial fishing , because the fish will simply be go . imagine the ocean without fish . imagine what that mean to our life support system . natural system on the land be in big trouble too , but the problem be more obvious , and some action be be take to protect tree , watershed and wildlife .     and in 1872 , with yellowstone national park , the united states begin establish a system of park that some say be the good idea america ever have . about 12 percent of the land around the world be now protect : safeguard biodiversity , provide a carbon sink , generate oxygen , protect watershed . and , in 1972 , this nation begin to establish a counterpart in the sea , national marine sanctuary . that be another great idea . the good news be that there be now more than 4,000 place in the sea , around the world , that have some kind of protection . and you can find they on google earth . the bad news be that you have to look hard to find they . in the last three year , for example , the u.s . protect 340,000 square mile of ocean as national monument . but it only increase from 0.6 of one percent to 0.8 of one percent of the ocean protect , globally . protect area do rebound , but it take a long time to restore 50 - year - old rockfish or monkfish , shark or sea bass , or 200 - year - old orange roughy . we do not consume 200 - year - old cow or chicken . protect area provide hope that the creature of ed wilson 's dream of an encyclopedia of life , or the census of marine life , will live not just as a list , a photograph , or a paragraph .     with scientist around the world , I 've be look at the 99 percent of the ocean that be open to fishing — and mining , and drilling , and dump , and whatever — to search out hope spot , and try to find way to give they and we a secure future . such as the arctic — we have one chance , right now , to get it right . or the antarctic , where the continent be protect , but the surround ocean be be strip of its krill , whale and fish . sargasso sea 's three million square mile of float forest be be gather up to feed cow . 97 percent of the land in the galapagos island be protect , but the adjacent sea be be ravage by fishing . it be true too in argentina on the patagonian shelf , which be now in serious trouble . the high sea , where whale , tuna and dolphin travel — the large , least protect , ecosystem on earth , fill with luminous creature , live in dark water that average two mile deep . they flash , and sparkle , and glow with their own living light .     there be still place in the sea as pristine as I know as a child . the next 10 year may be the most important , and the next 10,000 year the good chance our specie will have to protect what remain of the natural system that give we life . to cope with climate change , we need new way to generate power . we need new way , well way , to cope with poverty , war and disease . we need many thing to keep and maintain the world as a well place . but , nothing else will matter if we fail to protect the ocean . our fate and the ocean 's be one . we need to do for the ocean what al gore do for the sky above .     a global plan of action with a world conservation union , the iucn , be underway to protect biodiversity , to mitigate and recover from the impact of climate change , on the high sea and in coastal area , wherever we can identify critical place . new technology be need to map , photograph and explore the 95 percent of the ocean that we have yet to see . the goal be to protect biodiversity , to provide stability and resilience . we need deep - diving sub , new technology to explore the ocean . we need , maybe , an expedition — a ted at sea — that could help figure out the next step .     and so , I suppose you want to know what my wish be . I wish you would use all mean at your disposal — film , expedition , the web , new submarine — and campaign to ignite public support for a global network of marine protect area — hope spot large enough to save and restore the ocean , the blue heart of the planet . how much ? some say 10 percent , some say 30 percent . you decide : how much of your heart do you want to protect ? whatever it be , a fraction of one percent be not enough . my wish be a big wish , but if we can make it happen , it can truly change the world , and help ensure the survival of what actually — as it turn out — be my favorite specie ; that would be we . for the child of today , for tomorrow 's child : as never again , now be the time .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   so , my question : be we alone ?     the story of human be the story of idea — scientific idea that shine light into dark corner , idea that we embrace rationally and irrationally , idea for which we 've live and die and kill and be kill , idea that have vanish in history , and idea that have be set in dogma . it be a story of nation , of ideology , of territory , and of conflict among they . but , every moment of human history , from the stone age to the information age , from sumer and babylon to the ipod and celebrity gossip , they 've all be carry out — every book that you 've read , every poem , every laugh , every tear — they 've all happen here . here . here . here . ( laughter )     perspective be a very powerful thing . perspective can change . perspective can be alter . from my perspective , we live on a fragile island of life , in a universe of possibility . for many millennia , human have be on a journey to find answer , answer to question about naturalism and transcendence , about who we be and why we be , and of course , who else might be out there . be it really just we ? be we alone in this vast universe of energy and matter and chemistry and physics ? well , if we be , it be an awful waste of space . ( laughter ) but , what if we be not ?     what if , out there , other be ask and answer similar question ? what if they look up at the night sky , at the same star , but from the opposite side ? would the discovery of an old cultural civilization out there inspire we to find way to survive our increasingly uncertain technological adolescence ? might it be the discovery of a distant civilization and our common cosmic origin that finally drive home the message of the bond among all human ? whether we be bear in san francisco , or sudan , or close to the heart of the milky way galaxy , we be the product of a billion - year lineage of wandering stardust . we , all of we , be what happen when a primordial mixture of hydrogen and helium evolve for so long that it begin to ask where it come from . fifty year ago , the journey to find answer take a different path and seti , the search for extra - terrestrial intelligence , begin .     so , what exactly be seti ? well , seti use the tool of astronomy to try and find evidence of someone else 's technology out there . our own technology be visible over interstellar distance , and theirs might be as well . it might be that some massive network of communication , or some shield against asteroidal impact , or some huge astro - engineering project that we can not even begin to conceive of , could generate signal at radio or optical frequency that a determined program of search might detect . for millennia , we 've actually turn to the priest and the philosopher for guidance and instruction on this question of whether there be intelligent life out there . now , we can use the tool of the 21st century to try and observe what be , rather than ask what should be , believe .     seti do not presume the existence of extra terrestrial intelligence ; it merely note the possibility , if not the probability in this vast universe , which seem fairly uniform . the number suggest a universe of possibility . our sun be one of 400 billion star in our galaxy , and we know that many other star have planetary system . we 've discover over 350 in the last 14 year , include the small planet , announce early this week , which have a radius just twice the size of the earth . and , if even all of the planetary system in our galaxy be devoid of life , there be still 100 billion other galaxy out there , altogether 10 ^ 22 star . now , I be go to try a trick , and recreate an experiment from this morning . remember , one billion ? but , this time not one billion dollar , one billion star . alright , one billion star . now , up there , 20 foot above the stage , that be 10 trillion . well , what about 10 ^ 22 ? where be the line that mark that ? that line would have to be 3.8 million mile above this stage . ( laughter ) 16 time far away than the moon , or four percent of the distance to the sun .     so , there be many possibility . ( laughter ) and much of this vast universe , much more may be habitable than we once think , as we study extremophile on earth — organism that can live in condition totally inhospitable for we , in the hot , high pressure thermal vent at the bottom of the ocean , freeze in ice , in boiling battery acid , in the cool water of nuclear reactor . these extremophile tell we that life may exist in many other environment .     but those environment be go to be widely space in this universe . even our near star , the sun — its emission suffer the tyranny of light speed . it take a full eight minute for its radiation to reach we . and the near star be 4.2 light year away , which mean its light take 4.2 year to get here . and the edge of our galaxy be 75,000 light year away , and the near galaxy to we , 2.5 million light year . that mean any signal we detect would have start its journey a long time ago . and a signal would give we a glimpse of their past , not their present . which be why phil morrison call seti , " the archaeology of the future . " it tell we about their past , but detection of a signal tell we it be possible for we to have a long future .     I think this be what david deutsch mean in 2005 , when he end his oxford tedtalk by say he have two principle he would like to share for living , and he would like to carve they on stone tablet . the first be that problem be inevitable . the second be that problem be soluble . so , ultimately what be go to determine the success or failure of seti be the longevity of technology , and the mean distance between technology in the cosmo — distance over space and distance over time . if technology do not last and persist , we will not succeed . and we be a very young technology in an old galaxy , and we do not yet know whether it be possible for technology to persist .     so , up until now I 've be talk to you about really large number . let I talk about a relatively small number . and that be the length of time that the earth be lifeless . zircon that be mine in the jack hill of western australia , zircon take from the jack hill of western australia tell we that within a few hundred million year of the origin of the planet there be abundant water and perhaps even life . so , our planet have spend the vast majority of its 4.56 billion year history develop life , not anticipate its emergence . life happen very quickly , and that bode well for the potential of life elsewhere in the cosmo .     and the other thing that one should take away from this chart be the very narrow range of time over which human can claim to be the dominant intelligence on the planet . it be only the last few hundred thousand year modern human have be pursue technology and civilization . so , one need a very deep appreciation of the diversity and incredible scale of life on this planet as the first step in prepare to make contact with life elsewhere in the cosmo .     we be not the pinnacle of evolution . we be not the determined product of billion of year of evolutionary plotting and planning . we be one outcome of a continue adaptational process . we be resident of one small planet in a corner of the milky way galaxy . and homo sapien be one small leaf on a very extensive tree of life , which be densely populate by organism that have be hone for survival over million of year . we misuse language , and talk about the " ascent " of man . we understand the scientific basis for the interrelatedness of life but our ego have not catch up yet . so this " ascent " of man , pinnacle of evolution , have get to go . it be a sense of privilege that the natural universe do not share .     loren eiseley have say , " one do not meet oneself until one catch the reflection from an eye other than human . " one day that eye may be that of an intelligent alien , and the soon we eschew our narrow view of evolution the soon we can truly explore our ultimate origin and destination .     we be a small part of the story of cosmic evolution , and we be go to be responsible for our continued participation in that story , and perhaps seti will help as well . occasionally , throughout history , this concept of this very large cosmic perspective come to the surface , and as a result we see transformative and profound discovery . so in 1543 , nicholas copernicus publish " the revolution of heavenly sphere , " and by take the earth out of the center , and put the sun in the center of the solar system , he open our eye to a much large universe , of which we be just a small part . and that copernican revolution continue today to influence science and philosophy and technology and theology .     so , in 1959 , giuseppe coccone and philip morrison publish the first seti article in a refereed journal , and bring seti into the scientific mainstream . and in 1960 , frank drake conduct the first seti observation look at two star , tau ceti and epsilon eridani , for about 150 hour . now drake do not discover extraterrestrial intelligence , but he learn a very valuable lesson from a pass aircraft , and that be that terrestrial technology can interfere with the search for extraterrestrial technology .     we 've be search ever since , but it be impossible to overstate the magnitude of the search that remain . all of the concerted seti effort , over the last 40 - some year , be equivalent to scoop a single glass of water from the ocean . and no one would decide that the ocean be without fish on the basis of one glass of water . the 21st century now allow we to build big glass — much big glass . in northern california , we be begin to take observation with the first 42 telescope of the allen telescope array — and I 've get to take a moment right now to publicly thank paul allen and nathan myhrvold and all the teamseti member in the ted community who have so generously support this research . ( applause )     the ata be the first telescope build from a large number of small dish , and hook together with computer . it be make silicon as important as aluminum , and we 'll grow it in the future by add more antenna to reach 350 for more sensitivity and leverage moore 's law for more processing capability . today , our signal detection algorithm can find very simple artifact and noise . if you look very hard here you can see the signal from the voyager 1 spacecraft , the most distant human object in the universe , 106 time as far away from we as the sun be . and over those long distance , its signal be very faint when it reach we . it may be hard for your eye to see it , but it be easily find with our efficient algorithm . but this be a simple signal , and tomorrow we want to be able to find more complex signal .     this be a very good year . 2009 be the 400th anniversary of galileo 's first use of the telescope , darwin 's 200th birthday , the 150th anniversary of the publication of " on the origin of specie , " the 50th anniversary of seti as a science , the 25th anniversary of the incorporation of the seti institute as a non - profit , and of course , the 25th anniversary of ted . and next month , the kepler spacecraft will launch and will begin to tell we just how frequent earth - like planet be , the target for seti 's search . in 2009 , the u.n . have declare it to be the international year of astronomy , a global festival to help we resident of earth rediscover our cosmic origin and our place in the universe . and in 2009 , change have come to washington , with a promise to put science in its rightful position . ( applause )     so , what would change everything ? well , this be the question the edge foundation ask this year , and four of the respondent say , " seti . " why ? well , to quote : " the discovery of intelligent life beyond earth would eradicate the loneliness and solipsism that have plague our specie since its inception . and it would not simply change everything , it would change you all at once . " so , if that be right , why do we only capture four out of those 151 mind ? I think it be a problem of completion and delivery , because the fine print say , " what game - change idea and scientific development would you expect to live to see ? " so , we have a fulfillment problem . we need big glass and more hand in the water , and then work together , maybe we can all live to see the detection of the first extraterrestrial signal .     that bring I to my wish . I wish that you would empower earthling everywhere to become active participant in the ultimate search for cosmic company .     the first step would be to tap into the global brain trust , to build an environment where raw datum could be store , and where it could be access and manipulate , where new algorithm could be develop and old algorithm make more efficient . and this be a technically creative challenge , and it would change the perspective of people who work on it . and then , we would like to augment the automate search with human insight . we would like to use the pattern recognition capability of the human eye to find faint , complex signal that our current algorithm miss .     and , of course , we would like to inspire and engage the next generation . we would like to take the material that we have build for education , and get they out to student everywhere , student that can not come and visit we at the ata . we would like to tell our story well , and engage young people , and thereby change their perspective .     I be sorry seth godin , but over the millennia , we 've see where tribalism lead . we 've see what happen when we divide an already small planet into small island . and , ultimately , we you all belong to only one tribe , to earthling . and seti be a mirror — a mirror that can show we ourselves from an extraordinary perspective , and can help to trivialize the difference among we . if seti do nothing but change the perspective of human on this planet , then it will be one of the most profound endeavor in history .     so , in the opening day of 2009 , a visionary president stand on the step of the u.s . capitol and say , " we can not help but believe that the old hatred shall someday pass , that the line of tribe shall soon dissolve , that , as the world grow small , our common humanity shall reveal itself . " so , I look forward to work with the ted community to hear about your idea about how to fulfill this wish , and in collaborate with you , hasten the day that that visionary statement can become a reality .     thank you . ( applause )  
   back in 1992 , I start work for a company call interval research , which be just then be found by david lidell and paul allen as a for - profit research enterprise in silicon valley .     I meet with david to talk about what I might do in his company . I be just come out of a fail virtual reality business and support myself by be on the speaking circuit and write book — after twenty year or so in the computer game industry have idea that people do not think they could sell .     and david and I discover that we have a question in common , that we really want the answer to , and that be , " why have not anybody build any computer game for little girl ? " why be that ? it can not just be a giant sexist conspiracy . these people be not that smart . there be six billion dollar on the table . they would go for it if they could figure out how .     so , what be the deal here ? and as we think about our goal — I should say that interval be really a humanistic institution , in the classical sense that humanism , at its good , find a way to combine clear - eyed empirical research with a set of core value that fundamentally love and respect people . the basic idea of humanism be the improvable quality of life ; that we can do good thing , that there be thing worth do because they be good thing to do , and that clear - eyed empiricism can help we figure out how to do they .     so , contrary to popular belief , there be not a conflict of interest between empiricism and value . and interval research be kind of the live example of how that can be true . so david and I decide to go find out , through the good research we could muster , what it would take to get a little girl to put her hand on a computer , to achieve the level of comfort and ease with the technology that little boy have because they play video game .     we spend two and a half year conduct research ; we spend another year and a half in advance development . then we form a spin - off company . in the research phase of the project at interval , we partner with a company call cheskin research , and these people — davis masten and christopher ireland — change my mind entirely about what market research be and what it could be . they teach I how to look and see , and they do not do the incredibly stupid thing of say to a child , " of all these thing we already make you , which do you like good ? " — which give you zero answer that be usable .     so , what we do for the first two and a half year be four thing : we do an extensive review of the literature in relate field , like cognitive psychology , spatial cognition , gender study , play theory , sociology , primatology . thank you fran de waal , wherever you be , I love you and I would give anything to meet you .     after we have do that with a pretty large team of people and discover what we think the salient issue be with girl and boy and playing — because , after all , that be really what this be about — we move to the second phase of our work , where we interview adult expert in academia , some of the people who have produce the literature that we find relevant . also , we do focus group with people who be on the ground with kid every day , like playground supervisor . we talk to they , confirm some hypothesis and identify some serious question about gender difference and play .     then we do what I consider to be the heart of the work : interview 1,100 child , boy and girl , age seven to 12 , all over the united states — except for silicon valley , boston and austin because we know that their little family would have million of computer in they and they would not be a representative sample .     and at the end of those remarkable conversation with kid and their good friend across the united states , after two year , we pull together some survey datum from another 10,000 child , draw up a set up of what we think be the key finding of our research , and spend another year transform they into design heuristic , for design computer - base product — and , in fact , any kind of product — for little girl , age eight to 12 . and we spend that time design interactive prototype for computer software and test they with little girl . in 1996 , in november , we form the company purple moon which be a spinoff of interval research , and our chief investor be interval research , vulcan northwest , institutional venture partner and allen and company .     we launch a website on september 2nd that have now serve 25 million page , and have 42,000 register young girl user . they visit an average of one and a half time a day , spend an average of 35 minute a visit , and look at 50 page a visit . so we feel that we 've form a successful online community with girl .     we launch two title in october — " rockett 's new school " — the first of a series of product — be about a character call rockett begin her first day of school in eighth grade at a brand new place , with a blank slate , which allow girl to play with the question of , " what will I be like when I be old ? " " what be it go to be like to be in high school or junior high school ? who be my friend ? " ; to exercise the love of social complexity and the narrative intelligence that drive most of their play behavior ; and which embed in it value about notice that we have lot of choice in our life and the way that we conduct ourselves .     the other title that we launch be call " secret path in the forest , " which address the more fantasy - orient , inner life of girl . these two title both show up in the top 50 entertainment title in pc data — entertainment title in pc datum in december , right up there with " john madden football , " which thrill I to death . so , we be real , and we 've touch several hundred of thousand of little girl . we 've make half - a - billion impression with marketing and pr for this brand , purple moon . ninety - six percent of they , roughly , have be positive ; four percent of they have be " other . " I want to talk about the other , because the politic of this enterprise , in a way , have be the most fascinating part of it , for I .     there be really two kind of negative review that we 've receive . one kind of reviewer be a male gamer who think he know what game ought to be , and will not show the product to little girl . the other kind of reviewer be a certain flavor of feminist who think they know what little girl ought to be . and so it be funny to I that these interesting , odd bedfellow have one thing in common : they do not listen to little girl . they have not look at child and they be certainly not demonstrate any love for they . I would like to play you some voice of little girl from the two - and - a - half year of research that we do — actually , some of the voice be more recent . and these voice will be accompany by photograph that they take for we of their life , of the thing that they value and care about . these be picture the girl themselves never see , but they give to we this be the stuff those reviewer do not know about and be not listen to and this be the kind of research I recommend to those who want to do humanistic work .     girl 1 : yeah , my character be usually a tomboy . hers be more into boy .     girl 2 : uh , yeah .     girl 1 : we have — in the very beginning of the whole game , always we do this : we each have a piece of paper ; we write down our name , our age — be we rich , very rich , not rich , poor , medium , wealthy , boyfriend , dog , pet — what else — sister , brother , and all those .     girl 2 : divorced — parent divorce , maybe .     girl 3 : this be my pretend [ unclear ] one .     girl 4 : we make a school newspaper on the computer .     girl 5 : for a girl 's game also usually they 'll have really pretty scenery with cloud and flower . girl 6 : like , if you be a girl and you be really adventurous and a real big tomboy , you would think that girl ' game be kinda sissy .     girl 7 : I run track , I play soccer , I play basketball , and I love a lot of thing to do . and sometimes I feel like I can not really enjoy myself unless it be like a vacation , like when I get monday and all those day off .     girl 8 : well , sometimes there be a lot of stuff go on because I have music lesson and I be on swim team — all this different stuff that I have to do , and sometimes it get overwhelming . girl 9 : my friend justine kinda take my friend kelly , and now they be be mean to I .     girl 10 : well , sometimes it get annoying when your brother and sister , or brother or sister , when they copy you and you get your idea first and they take your idea and they do it themselves .     girl 11 : because my old sister , she get everything and , like , when I ask my mom for something , she 'll say , " no " — all the time . but she give my sister everything .     brenda laurel : I want to show you , real quickly , just a minute of " rockett 's tricky decision , " which go gold two day ago . let us hope it be really stable . this be the second day in rockett 's life . the reason I be show you this be I be hope that the scene that I be go to show you will look familiar and sound familiar , now that you 've listen to some girl ' voice . and you can see how we 've try to incorporate the issue that matter to they in the game that we 've create .     miko : hey rockett ! c'mere !     rockett : hi miko ! what be go on ?     miko : do you hear about nakilia 's big halloween party this weekend ? she ask I to make sure you know about it . nakilia invite reuben too , but —     rockett : but what ? be not he come ?     miko : I do not think so . I mean , I hear his band be play at another party the same night .     rockett : really ? what other party ?     girl : max 's party be go to be so cool , whitney . he be invite all the good people .     bl : I be go to fast - forward to the decision point because I know I do not have a lot of time . after this awful event occur , rocket get to decide how she feel about it .     rockett : who would want to show up at that party anyway ? I could get invite to that party any day if I want to . gee , I doubt I 'll make max 's good people list .     bl : ok , so we be go to emotionally navigate . if we be play the game , that be what we would do . if at any time during the game we want to learn more about the character , we can go into this hidden hallway , and I 'll quickly just show you the interface . we can , for example , go find miko 's locker and get some more information about she . oop , I turn the wrong way . but you get the general idea of the product .     I want to show you the way , innocuous as they seem , in which we be incorporate what we 've learn about girl — their desire to experience great emotional flexibility , and to play around with the social complexity of their life . I want to make the point that what we be give girl , I think , through this effort , be a kind of validation , a sense of be see . and a sense of the choice that be available in their life . we love they . we see they . we be not try to tell they who they ought to be . but we be really , really happy about who they be . it turn out they be really great .     I want to close by show you a videotape that be a version of a future game in the rockett series that our graphic artist and design people put together , that we feel would please that four percent of reviewer . " rockett 28 ! "     rockett : it be like I be just wake up , you know ?     bl : thank .  
   tree be wonderful arena for discovery because of their tall stature , their complex structure , the biodiversity they foster and their quiet beauty . I use to climb tree for fun all the time and now , as a grown - up , I have make my profession understand tree and forest , through the medium of science .     the most mysterious part of forest be the upper tree canopy . and dr . terry erwin , in 1983 , call the canopy , " the last biotic frontier . " I would like to take you all on a journey up to the forest canopy , and share with you what canopy researcher be ask and also how they be communicate with other people outside of science .     let us start our journey on the forest floor of one of my study site in costa rica . because of the overhanging leave and branch , you 'll notice that the understory be very dark , it be very still . and what I would like to do be take you up to the canopy , not by put all of you into rope and harness , but rather show you a very short clip from a national geographic film call " hero of the high frontier . " this be film in monteverde , costa rica and I think it give we the good impression of what it be like to climb a giant strangler fig . ( music ) ( growl ) ( rustle )     so what you 'll see up there be that it be really like the atmosphere of an open field , and there be tremendous number of plant and animal that have adapt to make their way and their life in the canopy . common group , like the sloth here , have clear adaptation for forest canopy , hang on with their very strong claw . but I would like to describe to you a more subtle kind of diversity and tell you about the ant . there be 10,000 specie of ant that taxonomist — people who describe and name animal — have name . 4,000 of those ant live exclusively in the forest canopy .     one of the reason I tell you about ant be because of my husband , who be in fact an ant taxonomist and when we got marry , he promise to name an ant after I , which he do — procryptocerus nalini , a canopy ant . we 've have two child , august andrew and erika and actually , he name ant after they . so we may be the only family that have an ant name after each one of we .     but my passion — in addition to jack and my child — be the plant , the so - call epiphyte , those plant that grow up on tree . they do not have root that go into trunk nor to the forest floor . but rather , it be their leave that be adapt to intercept the dissolve nutrient that come to they in the form of mist and fog . these plant occur in great diversity , over 28,000 specie around the world . they grow in tropical forest like this one and they also grow in temperate rainforest , that we find in washington state .     these epiphyte be mainly dominate by the moss . one thing I want to point out be that underneath these live epiphyte , as they die and decompose , they actually construct an arboreal soil , both in the temperate zone and in the tropic . and these moss , generate by decompose , be like peat moss in your garden . they have a tremendous capacity for hold on to nutrient and water .     one of the surprising thing I discover be that , if you pull back with I on those mat of epiphyte , what you 'll find underneath they be connection , network of what we call canopy root . these be not epiphyte root : these be root that emerge from the trunk and branch of the host tree themselves . and so those epiphyte be actually pay the landlord a bit of rent in exchange for be support high above the forest floor .     I be interested , and my canopy researcher colleague have be interested in the dynamic of the canopy plant that live in the forest . we 've do strip experiment where we 've remove mat of epiphyte and look at the rate of recolonization . we have predict that they would grow back very quickly and that they would come in encroach from the side . what we find , however , be that they take an extremely long time — over 20 year — to regenerate , start from the bottom and grow up . and even now , after 25 year , they be not up there , they have not recolonize completely . and I use this little image to say this be what happen to moss . if it be go , it be go , and if you be really lucky you might get something grow back from the bottom .     ( laughter )     so , recolonization be really very slow . these canopy community be fragile . well , when we look out , you and I , over that canopy of the intact primary forest , what we see be this enormous carpet of carbon . one of the challenge that canopy researcher be attack today be try to understand the amount of carbon that be be sequester . we know it be a lot , but we do not yet know the answer to how much , and by what process , carbon be be take out of the atmosphere , hold in its biomass , and move on through the ecosystem .     so I hope I 've show you that canopy - dweller be not just insignificant bit of green up high in the canopy that tarzan and jane be interested in , but rather that they foster biodiversity contribute to ecosystem nutrient cycle , and they also help to keep our global climate stable .     up in the canopy , if you be sit next to I and you turn around from those primary forest ecosystem , you would also see scene like this . scene of forest destruction , forest harvesting and forest fragmentation , thereby make that intact tapestry of the canopy unable to function in the marvelous way that it have when it be not disturb by human .     I 've also look out on urban place like this and think about people who be disassociate from tree in their life . people who grow up in a place like this do not have the opportunity to climb tree and form a relationship with tree and forest , as I do when I be a young girl . this trouble I .     here in 2009 , you know , it be not an easy thing to be a forest ecologist , grip ourselves with these kind of question and try to figure out how we can answer they . and especially , you know , as a small brown woman in a little college , in the upper northwest part of our country , far away from the area of power and money , I really have to ask myself , " what can I do about this ? how can I reconnect people with tree ? "     well , I think that I can do something . I know that as a scientist , I have information and as a human being , I can communicate with anybody , inside or outside of academia . and so , that be what I 've begin do , and so I would like to unveil the international canopy network here . we consult to the medium about canopy question ; we have a canopy newsletter ; we have an email listserv . and so we be try to disseminate information about the importance of the canopy , the beauty of the canopy , the necessity of intact canopy , to people outside of academia . we also recognize that a lot of the product that we make — those video and so forth — you know , they do not reach everybody , and so we 've be foster project that reach people outside of academia , and outside of the choir that most ecologist preach to .     treetop barbie be a great example of that . what we do , my student in my lab and I , be we buy barbie from goodwill and value village , we dress she in clothe that have be make by seamstress and we send she out with a canopy handbook . and my feeling be —     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     — that we 've take this pop icon and we have just tweak she a little bit to become an ambassador who can carry the message that be a woman scientist study treetop be actually a really great thing .     we 've also make partnership with artist , with people who understand and can communicate the aesthetic beauty of tree and forest canopy . and I would like to just tell you one of our project , which be the generation of canopy confluence . what I do be I bring together scientist and artist of all kind , and we spend a week in the forest on these little platform ; and we look at nature , we look at tree , we look at the canopy , and we communicate , and exchange , and express what we see together . the result have be fantastic .     I 'll just give you a few example . this be a fantastic installation by bruce chao who be chair of the sculpture and glass blow department at rhode island school of design . he see nest in the canopy at one of our canopy confluence in the pacific northwest , and create this beautiful sculpture . we 've have dance people up in the canopy . jodi lomask , and her wonderful troupe capacitor , join I in the canopy in my rainfor site in costa rica . they make a fabulous dance call " biome . "     they dance in the forest , and we be take this dance , my scientific outreach communication , and also link up with environmental group , to go to different city and to perform the science , the dance and the environmental outreach that we hope will make a difference . we bring musician to the canopy , and they make their music — and it be fantastic music . we have wooden flutist , we have oboist , we have opera singer , we have guitar player , and we have rap singer . and I bring a little segment to give you of duke brady 's " canopy rap . " ( music ) that be duke !     ( applause )     this experience of work with duke also lead I to initiate a program call sound science . I see the power of duke 's song with urban youth — an audience , you know , I as a middle - aged professor , I do not have a hope of get to — in term of convince they of the importance of wildland . so I engage caution , this rap singer , with a group of young people from inner - city tacoma . we go out to the forest , I would pick up a branch , caution would rap on it , and suddenly that branch be really cool . and then the student would come into our sound studio , they would make their own rap song with their own beat . they end up make a cd which they take home to their family and friend , thereby express their own experience with nature in their own medium .     the final project I 'll talk about be one that be very close to my heart , and it involve an economic and social value that be associate with epiphytic plant . in the pacific northwest , there be a whole industry of moss - harvesting from old - growth forest . these moss be take from the forest ; they be use by the floriculture industry , by florist , to make arrangement and make hang basket . it be a 265 million dollar industry and it be increase rapidly . if you remember that bald guy , you 'll know that what have be strip off of these trunk in the pacific northwest old - growth forest be go to take decade and decade to come back . so this whole industry be unsustainable . what can I , as an ecologist , do about that ?     well , my thought be that I could learn how to grow moss , and that way we would not have to take they out of the wild . and I think , if I have some partner that could help I with this , that would be great . and so , I think perhaps incarcerate man and woman — who do not have access to nature , who often have a lot of time , they often have space , and you do not need any sharp tool to work with moss — would be great partner . and they have become excellent partner . the good I can imagine . they be very enthusiastic .     ( applause )     they be incredibly enthusiastic about the work . they learn how to distinguish different specie of moss , which , to tell you the truth , be a lot more than my undergraduate student at the evergreen college can do . and they embrace the idea that they could help develop a research design in order to grow these moss . we 've be successful as partner in figure out which specie grow the fast , and I 've just be overwhelmed with how successful this have be . because the prison warden be very enthusiastic about this as well , I start a science and sustainability seminar in the prison . I bring my scientific colleague and sustainability practitioner into the prison . we give talk once a month , and that actually end up implement some amazing sustainability project at the prison — organic garden , worm culture , recycling , water catchment and beekeepe . ( applause )     our late endeavor ,     with a grant     from the department of correction at washington state , they 've ask we to expand this program to three more prison . and our new project be have the inmate and ourselves learn how to raise the oregon spot frog which be a highly endanger amphibian in washington state and oregon . so they will raise they — in captivity , of course — from egg to tadpole and onward to frog . and they will have the pleasure , many of they , of see those frog that they 've raise from egg and help develop , help nurture , move out into protect wildland to augment the number of endanger specie out there in the wild .     and so , I think for many reason — ecological , social , economic and perhaps even spiritual — this have be a tremendous project and I be really look forward to not only myself and my student do it , but also to promote and teach other scientist how to do this . as many of you be aware , the world of academia be a rather inward - look one . I be try to help researcher move more outward to have their own partnership with people outside of the academic community . and so I be hope that my husband jack , the ant taxonomist , can perhaps work with mattel to make taxonomist ken . perhaps ben zander and bill gate could get together and make an opera about aids . or perhaps al gore and naturally 7 could make a song about climate change that would really make you clap your hand .     so , although it be a little bit of a fantasy , I think it be also a reality . give the duress that we be feel environmentally in these time , it be time for scientist to reach outward , and time for those outside of science to reach towards academia as well . I start my career with try to understand the mystery of forest with the tool of science . by make these partnership that I describe to you , I have really open my mind and , I have to say , my heart to have a great understanding , to make other discovery about nature and myself .     when I look into my heart , I see tree — this be actually an image of a real heart — there be tree in our heart , there be tree in your heart . when we come to understand nature , we be touch the most deep , the most important part of our self . in these partnership , I have also learn that people tend to compartmentalize themselves into it people , and movie star people , and scientist , but when we share nature , when we share our perspective about nature , we find a common denominator .     finally , as a scientist and as a person and now , as part of the ted community , I feel that I have well tool to go out to tree , to go out to forest , to go out to nature , to make new discovery about nature — and about human ' place in nature wherever we be and whomever you be .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   I be speak to a group of about 300 kid , age six to eight , at a child 's museum , and I bring with I a bag full of leg , similar to the kind of thing you see up here , and have they lay out on a table for the kid . and , from my experience , you know , kid be naturally curious about what they do not know , or do not understand , or be foreign to they . they only learn to be frighten of those difference when an adult influence they to behave that way , and maybe censor that natural curiosity , or you know , rein in the question - ask in the hope of they be polite little kid . so I just picture a first grade teacher out in the lobby with these unruly kid , say , " now , whatever you do , do not stare at her leg . "     but , of course , that be the point . that be why I be there , I want to invite they to look and explore . so I make a deal with the adult that the kid could come in without any adult for two minute on their own . the door open , the kid descend on this table of leg , and they be poke and prodding , and they be wiggle toe , and they be try to put their full weight on the sprinting leg to see what happen with that . and I say , " kid , really quickly — I wake up this morning , I decide I want to be able to jump over a house — nothing too big , two or three story — but , if you could think of any animal , any superhero , any cartoon character , anything you can dream up right now , what kind of leg would you build I ? "     and immediately a voice shout , " kangaroo ! " " no , no , no ! should be a frog ! " " no . it should be go go gadget ! " " no , no , no ! it should be the incredible . " and other thing that I do not — be not familiar with . and then , one eight - year - old say , " hey , why would not you want to fly too ? " and the whole room , include I , be like , " yeah . " ( laughter ) and just like that , I go from be a woman that these kid would have be train to see as " disabled " to somebody that have potential that their body do not have yet . somebody that might even be super - abled . interesting .     so some of you actually see I at ted , 11 year ago . and there be be a lot of talk about how life - change this conference be for both speaker and attendee , and I be no exception . ted literally be the launch pad to the next decade of my life 's exploration . at the time , the leg I present be groundbreake in prosthetic . I have weave carbon fiber sprinting leg model after the hind leg of a cheetah , which you may have see on stage yesterday . and also these very life - like , intrinsically paint silicone leg .     so at the time , it be my opportunity to put a call out to innovator outside the traditional medical prosthetic community to come bring their talent to the science and to the art of building leg . so that we can stop compartmentalize form , function and aesthetic , and assign they different value . well , lucky for I , a lot of people answer that call . and the journey start , funny enough , with a ted conference attendee — chee pearlman , who hopefully be in the audience somewhere today . she be the editor then of a magazine call I d , and she give I a cover story .     this start an incredible journey . curious encounter be happen to I at the time ; I would be accept numerous invitation to speak on the design of the cheetah leg around the world . and people would come up to I after the conference , after my talk , man and woman . and the conversation would go something like this , " you know aimee , you be very attractive . you do not look disabled . " ( laughter ) I think , " well , that be amazing , because I do not feel disabled . " and it really open my eye to this conversation that could be explore , about beauty . what do a beautiful woman have to look like ? what be a sexy body ? and interestingly , from an identity standpoint , what do it mean to have a disability ? I mean , people — pamela anderson have more prosthetic in her body than I do . nobody call she disabled . ( laughter )     so this magazine , through the hand of graphic designer peter saville , go to fashion designer alexander mcqueen , and photographer nick knight , who be also interested in explore that conversation . so , three month after ted I find myself on a plane to london , do my first fashion shoot , which result in this cover — " fashion - able " ? three month after that , I do my first runway show for alexander mcqueen on a pair of hand - carve wooden leg make from solid ash . nobody know — everyone think they be wooden boot . actually , I have they on stage with I : grapevine , magnolia — truly stunning . poetry matter . poetry be what elevate the banal and neglect object to a realm of art . it can transform the thing that might have make people fearful into something that invite they to look , and look a little long , and maybe even understand .     I learn this firsthand with my next adventure . the artist matthew barney , in his film opus call the " the cremaster cycle . " this be where it really hit home for I — that my leg could be wearable sculpture . and even at this point , I start to move away from the need to replicate human - ness as the only aesthetic ideal . so we make what people lovingly refer to as glass leg even though they be actually optically clear polyurethane , a.k.a . bowling ball material . heavy ! then we make these leg that be cast in soil with a potato root system grow in they , and beetroot out the top , and a very lovely brass toe . that be a good close - up of that one . then another character be a half - woman , half - cheetah — a little homage to my life as an athlete . 14 hour of prosthetic make - up to get into a creature that have articulate paw , claw and a tail that whip around , like a gecko . ( laughter ) and then another pair of leg we collaborate on be these — look like jellyfish leg , also polyurethane . and the only purpose that these leg can serve , outside the context of the film , be to provoke the sense and ignite the imagination . so whimsy matter .     today , I have over a dozen pair of prosthetic leg that various people have make for I , and with they I have different negotiation of the terrain under my foot , and I can change my height — I have a variable of five different height . ( laughter ) today , I be 6'1 " . and I have these leg make a little over a year ago at dorset orthopedic in england and when I bring they home to manhattan , my first night out on the town , I go to a very fancy party . and a girl be there who have know I for year at my normal 5'8 " . her mouth drop open when she see I , and she go , " but you be so tall ! " and I say , " I know . be not it fun ? " I mean , it be a little bit like wear stilt on stilt , but I have an entirely new relationship to door jam that I never expect I would ever have . and I be have fun with it . and she look at I , and she say , " but , aimee , that be not fair . " ( laughter ) ( applause ) and the incredible thing be she really mean it . it be not fair that you can change your height , as you want it .     and that be when I know — that be when I know that the conversation with society have change profoundly in this last decade . it be no long a conversation about overcome deficiency . it be a conversation about augmentation . it be a conversation about potential . a prosthetic limb do not represent the need to replace loss anymore . it can stand as a symbol that the wearer have the power to create whatever it be that they want to create in that space . so people that society once consider to be disabled can now become the architect of their own identity and indeed continue to change those identity by design their body from a place of empowerment . and what be exciting to I so much right now be that by combine cut - edge technology — robotic , bionics — with the age - old poetry , we be move close to understand our collective humanity . I think that if we want to discover the full potential in our humanity , we need to celebrate those heartbreaking strength and those glorious disability that we all have . I think of shakespeare 's shylock : " if you prick we , do we not bleed , and if you tickle we , do we not laugh ? " it be our humanity , and all the potential within it , that make we beautiful . thank you . ( applause )  
   I 've be work on issue of poverty for more than 20 year , and so it be ironic that the problem that and question that I most grapple with be how you actually define poverty . what do it mean ? so often , we look at dollar term — people make less than a dollar or two or three a day . and yet the complexity of poverty really have to look at income as only one variable . because really , it be a condition about choice , and the lack of freedom .     and I have an experience that really deepen and elucidated for I the understanding that I have . it be in kenya , and I want to share it with you . I be with my friend susan meiselas , the photographer , in the mathare valley slum . now , mathare valley be one of the old slum in africa . it be about three mile out of nairobi , and it be a mile long and about two - tenth of a mile wide , where over half a million people live cram in these little tin shack , generation after generation , rent they , often eight or 10 people to a room . and it be know for prostitution , violence , drug : a hard place to grow up . and when we be walk through the narrow alley , it be literally impossible not to step in the raw sewage and the garbage alongside the little home . but at the same time it be also impossible not to see the human vitality , the aspiration and the ambition of the people who live there : woman wash their baby , wash their clothe , hang they out to dry . I meet this woman , mama rise , who have rent that little tin shack for 32 year , where she live with her seven child . four sleep in one twin bed , and three sleep on the mud and linoleum floor . and she keep they all in school by sell water from that kiosk , and from sell soap and bread from the little store inside .     it be also the day after the inauguration , and I be remind how mathare be still connect to the globe . and I would see kid on the street corner , and they would say " obama , he be our brother ! " and I would say " well , obama 's my brother , so that make you my brother too . " and they would look quizzically , and then be like , " high five ! "     and it be here that I meet jane . I be strike immediately by the kindness and the gentleness in her face , and I ask she to tell I her story . she start off by tell I her dream . she say , " I have two . my first dream be to be a doctor , and the second be to marry a good man who would stay with I and my family , because my mother be a single mom , and could not afford to pay for school fee . so I have to give up the first dream , and I focus on the second . " she got marry when she be 18 , have a baby right away . and when she turn 20 , find herself pregnant with a second child , her mom die and her husband leave she — marry another woman . so she be again in mathare , with no income , no skill set , no money . and so she ultimately turn to prostitution . it be not organize in the way we often think of it . she would go into the city at night with about 20 girl , look for work , and sometimes come back with a few shilling , or sometimes with nothing . and she say , " you know , the poverty be not so bad . it be the humiliation and the embarrassment of it all . "     in 2001 , her life change . she have a girlfriend who have hear about this organization , jamii bora , that would lend money to people no matter how poor you be , as long as you provide a commensurate amount in saving . and so she spend a year to save 50 dollar , and start borrow , and over time she be able to buy a sewing machine . she start tailor . and that turn into what she do now , which be to go into the secondhand clothing market , and for about three dollar and 25 cent she buy an old ball gown . some of they might be one you give . and she repurpose they with frill and ribbon , and make these frothy confection that she sell to woman for their daughter 's sweet 16 or first holy communion — those milestone in a life that people want to celebrate all along the economic spectrum . and she do really good business . in fact , I watch her walk through the street hawk . and before you know it , there be a crowd of woman around she , buy these dress .     and I reflect , as I be watch she sell the dress , and also the jewelry that she make , that now jane make more than four dollar a day . and by many definition she be no long poor . but she still live in mathare valley . and so she can not move out . she live with all of that insecurity , and in fact , in january , during the ethnic riot , she be chase from her home and have to find a new shack in which she would live .     jamii bora understand that and understand that when we be talk about poverty , we 've get to look at people all along the economic spectrum . and so with patient capital from acuman and other organization , loan and investment that will go the long term with they , they build a low - cost housing development , about an hour outside nairobi central . and they design it from the perspective of customer like jane herself , insist on responsibility and accountability . so she have to give 10 percent of the mortgage — of the total value , or about 400 dollar in saving . and then they match her mortgage to what she pay in rent for her little shanty . and in the next couple of week , she be go to be among the first 200 family to move into this development .     when I ask she if she fear anything , or whether she would miss anything from mathare , she say , " what would I fear that I have not confront already ? I be hiv positive . I 've deal with it all . " and she say , " what would I miss ? you think I will miss the violence or the drug ? the lack of privacy ? do you think I 'll miss not know if my child be go to come home at the end of the day ? " she say " if you give I 10 minute my bag would be pack . " I say , " well what about your dream ? " and she say , " well , you know , my dream do not look exactly like I think they would when I be a little girl . but if I think about it , I think I want a husband , but what I really want be a family that be love . and I fiercely love my child , and they love I back . " she say , " I think that I want to be a doctor , but what I really want to be be somebody who serve and heal and cure . and so I feel so blessed with everything that I have , that two day a week I go and I counsel hiv patient . and I say , ' look at I . you be not dead . you be still alive . and if you be still alive you have to serve . ' " and she say , " I be not a doctor who give out pill . but maybe I , I give out something well because I give they hope . "     and in the middle of this economic crisis , where so many of we be inclined to pull in with fear , I think we be well suited to take a cue from jane and reach out , recognize that be poor do not mean be ordinary . because when system be break , like the one that we be see around the world , it be an opportunity for invention and for innovation . it be an opportunity to truly build a world where we can extend service and product to all human being , so that they can make decision and choice for themselves . I truly believe it be where dignity start . we owe it to the jane of the world . and just as important , we owe it to ourselves .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   bacteria be the old living organism on the earth . they 've be here for billion of year , and what they be be single - celle microscopic organism . so they be one cell and they have this special property that they only have one piece of dna . they have very few gene , and genetic information to encode all of the trait that they carry out . and the way bacteria make a living be that they consume nutrient from the environment , they grow to twice their size , they cut themselves down in the middle , and one cell become two , and so on and so on . they just grow and divide , and grow and divide — so a kind of boring life , except that what I would argue be that you have an amazing interaction with these critter .     I know you guy think of yourself as human , and this be sort of how I think of you . this man be suppose to represent a generic human being , and all of the circle in that man be all of the cell that make up your body . there be about a trillion human cell that make each one of we who we be and able to do all the thing that we do , but you have 10 trillion bacterial cell in you or on you at any moment in your life . so , 10 time more bacterial cell than human cell on a human being . and of course it be the dna that count , so here be all the a , t , gs and cs that make up your genetic code , and give you all your charming characteristic . you have about 30,000 gene . well it turn out you have 100 time more bacterial gene play a role in you or on you all of your life . at the good , you be 10 percent human , but more likely about one percent human , depend on which of these metric you like . I know you think of yourself as human being , but I think of you as 90 or 99 percent bacterial .     ( laughter )     these bacteria be not passive rider , these be incredibly important , they keep we alive . they cover we in an invisible body armor that keep environmental insult out so that we stay healthy . they digest our food , they make our vitamin , they actually educate your immune system to keep bad microbe out . so they do all these amazing thing that help we and be vital for keep we alive , and they never get any press for that . but they get a lot of press because they do a lot of terrible thing as well . so , there be all kind of bacteria on the earth that have no business be in you or on you at any time , and if they be , they make you incredibly sick .     and so , the question for my lab be whether you want to think about all the good thing that bacteria do , or all the bad thing that bacteria do . the question we have be how could they do anything at all ? I mean they be incredibly small , you have to have a microscope to see one . they live this sort of boring life where they grow and divide , and they 've always be consider to be these asocial reclusive organism . and so it seem to we that they be just too small to have an impact on the environment if they simply act as individual . and so we want to think if there could not be a different way that bacteria live .     the clue to this come from another marine bacterium , and it be a bacterium call vibrio fischeri . what you be look at on this slide be just a person from my lab hold a flask of a liquid culture of a bacterium , a harmless beautiful bacterium that come from the ocean , name vibrio fischeri . this bacterium have the special property that it make light , so it make bioluminescence , like firefly make light . we be not do anything to the cell here . we just take the picture by turn the light off in the room , and this be what we see .     what be actually interesting to we be not that the bacteria make light , but when the bacteria make light . what we notice be when the bacteria be alone , so when they be in dilute suspension , they make no light . but when they grow to a certain cell number all the bacteria turn on light simultaneously . the question that we have be how can bacteria , these primitive organism , tell the difference from time when they be alone , and time when they be in a community , and then all do something together . what we 've figure out be that the way that they do that be that they talk to each other , and they talk with a chemical language .     this be now suppose to be my bacterial cell . when it be alone it do not make any light . but what it do do be to make and secrete small molecule that you can think of like hormone , and these be the red triangle , and when the bacteria be alone the molecule just float away and so no light . but when the bacteria grow and double and they be all participate in make these molecule , the molecule — the extracellular amount of that molecule increase in proportion to cell number . and when the molecule hit a certain amount that tell the bacteria how many neighbor there be , they recognize that molecule and all of the bacteria turn on light in synchrony . that be how bioluminescence work — they be talk with these chemical word .     the reason that vibrio fischeri be do that come from the biology . again , another plug for the animal in the ocean , vibrio fischeri live in this squid . what you be look at be the hawaiian bobtail squid , and it be be turn on its back , and what I hope you can see be these two glow lobe and these house the vibrio fischeri cell , they live in there , at high cell number that molecule be there , and they be make light . the reason the squid be willing to put up with these shenanigan be because it want that light . the way that this symbiosis work be that this little squid live just off the coast of hawaii , just in sort of shallow knee - deep water . the squid be nocturnal , so during the day it bury itself in the sand and sleep , but then at night it have to come out to hunt . on bright night when there be lot of starlight or moonlight that light can penetrate the depth of the water the squid live in , since it be just in those couple foot of water . what the squid have develop be a shutter that can open and close over this specialized light organ housing the bacteria . then it have detector on its back so it can sense how much starlight or moonlight be hit its back . and it open and close the shutter so the amount of light come out of the bottom — which be make by the bacterium — exactly match how much light hit the squid 's back , so the squid do not make a shadow . it actually use the light from the bacteria to counter - illuminate itself in an anti - predation device so predator can not see its shadow , calculate its trajectory , and eat it . this be like the stealth bomber of the ocean .     ( laughter )     but then if you think about it , the squid have this terrible problem because it be get this die , thick culture of bacteria and it can not sustain that . and so what happen be every morning when the sun come up the squid go back to sleep , it bury itself in the sand , and it be get a pump that be attach to its circadian rhythm , and when the sun come up it pump out like 95 percent of the bacteria . now the bacteria be dilute , that little hormone molecule be go , so they be not make light — but of course the squid do not care . it be asleep in the sand . and as the day go by the bacteria double , they release the molecule , and then light come on at night , exactly when the squid want it .     first we figure out how this bacterium do this , but then we bring the tool of molecular biology to this to figure out really what be the mechanism . and what we find — so this be now suppose to be , again , my bacterial cell — be that vibrio fischeri have a protein — that be the red box — it be an enzyme that make that little hormone molecule , the red triangle . and then as the cell grow , they be all release that molecule into the environment , so there be lot of molecule there . and the bacteria also have a receptor on their cell surface that fit like a lock and key with that molecule . these be just like the receptor on the surface of your cell . when the molecule increase to a certain amount — which say something about the number of cell — it lock down into that receptor and information come into the cell that tell the cell to turn on this collective behavior of make light .     why this be interesting be because in the past decade we have find that this be not just some anomaly of this ridiculous , glow - in - the - dark bacterium that live in the ocean — all bacteria have system like this . so now what we understand be that all bacteria can talk to each other . they make chemical word , they recognize those word , and they turn on group behavior that be only successful when all of the cell participate in unison . we have a fancy name for this : we call it quorum sense . they vote with these chemical vote , the vote gets count , and then everybody respond to the vote .     what be important for today 's talk be that we know that there be hundred of behavior that bacteria carry out in these collective fashion . but the one that be probably the most important to you be virulence . it be not like a couple bacteria get in you and they start secrete some toxin — you be enormous , that would have no effect on you . you be huge . what they do , we now understand , be they get in you , they wait , they start grow , they count themselves with these little molecule , and they recognize when they have the right cell number that if all of the bacteria launch their virulence attack together , they be go to be successful at overcome an enormous host . bacteria always control pathogenicity with quorum sense . that be how it work .     we also then go to look at what be these molecule — these be the red triangle on my slide before . this be the vibrio fischeri molecule . this be the word that it talk with . so then we start to look at other bacteria , and these be just a smattering of the molecule that we 've discover . what I hope you can see be that the molecule be relate . the left - hand part of the molecule be identical in every single specie of bacteria . but the right - hand part of the molecule be a little bit different in every single specie . what that do be to confer exquisite specie specificity to these language . each molecule fit into its partner receptor and no other . so these be private , secret conversation . these conversation be for intraspecie communication . each bacteria use a particular molecule that be its language that allow it to count its own sibling .     once we get that far we think we be start to understand that bacteria have these social behavior . but what we be really think about be that most of the time bacteria do not live by themselves , they live in incredible mixture , with hundred or thousand of other specie of bacteria . and that be depict on this slide . this be your skin . so this be just a picture — a micrograph of your skin . anywhere on your body , it look pretty much like this , and what I hope you can see be that there be all kind of bacteria there . and so we start to think if this really be about communication in bacteria , and it be about count your neighbor , it be not enough to be able to only talk within your specie . there have to be a way to take a census of the rest of the bacteria in the population .     so we go back to molecular biology and start study different bacteria , and what we 've find now be that in fact , bacteria be multilingual . you all have a species - specific system — they have a molecule that say " I . " but then , run in parallel to that be a second system that we 've discover , that be generic . so , they have a second enzyme that make a second signal and it have its own receptor , and this molecule be the trade language of bacteria . it be use you all different bacteria and it be the language of interspecie communication . what happen be that bacteria be able to count how many of I and how many of you . they take that information inside , and they decide what task to carry out depend on who be in the minority and who be in the majority of any give population .     then again we turn to chemistry , and we figure out what this generic molecule be — that be the pink oval on my last slide , this be it . it be a very small , five - carbon molecule . what the important thing be that we learn be that every bacterium have exactly the same enzyme and make exactly the same molecule . so they be all use this molecule for interspecie communication . this be the bacterial esperanto .     ( laughter )     once we get that far , we start to learn that bacteria can talk to each other with this chemical language . but what we start to think be that maybe there be something practical that we can do here as well . I 've tell you that bacteria do have all these social behavior , they communicate with these molecule . of course , I 've also tell you that one of the important thing they do be to initiate pathogenicity use quorum sense . we think , what if we make these bacteria so they can not talk or they can not hear ? could not these be new kind of antibiotic ?     of course , you 've just hear and you already know that we be run out of antibiotic . bacteria be incredibly multi - drug - resistant right now , and that be because all of the antibiotic that we use kill bacteria . they either pop the bacterial membrane , they make the bacterium so it can not replicate its dna . we kill bacteria with traditional antibiotic and that select for resistant mutant . and so now of course we have this global problem in infectious disease . we think , well what if we could sort of do behavior modification , just make these bacteria so they can not talk , they can not count , and they do not know to launch virulence .     and so that be exactly what we 've do , and we 've sort of take two strategy . the first one be we 've target the intraspecie communication system . so we make molecule that look kind of like the real molecule — which you see — but they be a little bit different . and so they lock into those receptor , and they jam recognition of the real thing . by target the red system , what we be able to do be to make species - specific , or disease - specific , anti - quorum sense molecule . we 've also do the same thing with the pink system . we 've take that universal molecule and turn it around a little bit so that we 've make antagonist of the interspecie communication system . the hope be that these will be use as broad - spectrum antibiotic that work against all bacteria .     to finish I 'll just show you the strategy . in this one I be just use the interspecie molecule , but the logic be exactly the same . what you know be that when that bacterium get into the animal , in this case , a mouse , it do not initiate virulence right away . it get in , it start grow , it start secrete its quorum sense molecule . it recognize when it have enough bacteria that now they be go to launch their attack , and the animal die . what we 've be able to do be to give these virulent infection , but we give they in conjunction with our anti - quorum sense molecule — so these be molecule that look kind of like the real thing , but they be a little bit different which I 've depict on this slide . what we now know be that if we treat the animal with a pathogenic bacterium — a multi - drug - resistant pathogenic bacterium — in the same time we give our anti - quorum sense molecule , in fact , the animal live .     we think that this be the next generation of antibiotic and it be go to get we around , at least initially , this big problem of resistance . what I hope you think , be that bacteria can talk to each other , they use chemical as their word , they have an incredibly complicated chemical lexicon that we be just now start to learn about . of course what that allow bacteria to do be to be multicellular . so in the spirit of ted they be do thing together because it make a difference . what happen be that bacteria have these collective behavior , and they can carry out task that they could never accomplish if they simply act as individual .     what I would hope that I could far argue to you be that this be the invention of multicellularity . bacteria have be on the earth for billion of year ; human , couple hundred thousand . we think bacteria make the rule for how multicellular organization work . we think , by study bacteria , we be go to be able to have insight about multicellularity in the human body . we know that the principle and the rule , if we can figure they out in these sort of primitive organism , the hope be that they will be apply to other human disease and human behavior as well . I hope that what you 've learn be that bacteria can distinguish self from other . by use these two molecule they can say " I " and they can say " you . " again of course that be what we do , both in a molecular way , and also in an outward way , but I think about the molecular stuff .     this be exactly what happen in your body . it be not like your heart cell and your kidney cell get all mix up every day , and that be because there be all of this chemistry go on , these molecule that say who each of these group of cell be , and what their task should be . again , we think that bacteria invent that , and you 've just evolve a few more bell and whistle , but all of the idea be in these simple system that we can study .     the final thing be , again just to reiterate that there be this practical part , and so we 've make these anti - quorum sense molecule that be be develop as new kind of therapeutic . but then , to finish with a plug for all the good and miraculous bacteria that live on the earth , we 've also make pro - quorum sense molecule . so , we 've target those system to make the molecule work well . remember you have these 10 time or more bacterial cell in you or on you , keep you healthy . what we be also try to do be to beef up the conversation of the bacteria that live as mutualist with you , in the hope of make you more healthy , make those conversation well , so bacteria can do thing that we want they to do well than they would be on their own .     finally , I want to show you this be my gang at princeton , new jersey . everything I tell you about be discover by someone in that picture . I hope when you learn thing , like about how the natural world work — I just want to say that whenever you read something in the newspaper or you get to hear some talk about something ridiculous in the natural world it be do by a child . science be do by that demographic . all of those people be between 20 and 30 year old , and they be the engine that drive scientific discovery in this country . it be a really lucky demographic to work with . I keep get old and old and they be always the same age , and it be just a crazy delightful job . I want to thank you for invite I here . it be a big treat for I to get to come to this conference .     ( applause )     thank .     ( applause )  
   I be go to talk about myself , which I rarely do , because I — well for one thing , I prefer to talk about thing I know nothing about . and secondly , I be a recover narcissist . ( laughter ) I do not know I be a narcissist actually . I think narcissism mean you love yourself . and then someone tell I there be a flip side to it . so it be actually dreary than self - love ; it be unrequited self - love . ( laughter ) I do not feel I can afford a relapse .     but I want to , though , explain how I come to design my own particular brand of comedy because I 've be through so many different form of it . I start with improvisation , in a particular form of improvisation call theater game , which have one rule , which I always think be a great rule for an ethic for a society . and the rule be , you could not deny the other person 's reality , you could only build on it .     and of course we live in a society that be all about contradict other people ' reality . it be all about contradiction , which I think be why I be so sensitive to contradiction in general . I see it everywhere . like poll . you know , it be always curious to I that in public opinion poll the percentage of americans who do not know the answer to any give question be always two percent . 75 percent of americans think alaska be part of canada . but only two percent do not know the effect that the debacle in argentina will have on the imf 's monetary policy — ( laughter ) seem a contradiction . or this ad that I read in the new york time : " wear a fine watch speak loudly of your rank in society . buy it from we scream good taste . " ( laughter ) or this that I find in a magazine call california lawyer , in an article that be surely mean for the lawyer at enron . " survive the slammer : do 's and don't . " ( laughter ) " do not use big word . " ( laughter ) " learn the lingua franca . " ( laughter ) yeah . " lingua this , frankie . "     ( laughter )     and I suppose it be a contradiction that I talk about science when I do not know math . you know , because — and by the way to I be so grateful to dean kaman for point out that one of the reason , that there be cultural reason that woman and minority do not enter the field of science and technology — because for instance , the reason I do not do math be , I be teach to do math and read at the same time . so you be six year old , you be read snow white and the seven dwarf , and it become rapidly obvious that there be only two kind of man in the world : dwarf and prince charming . and the odd be seven to one against your find the prince . ( laughter ) that be why little girl do not do math . it be too depressing .     ( laughter )     of course , by talk about science I also may , as I do the other night , incur the violent wrath of some scientist who be very upset with I . I use the word postmodern as if it be ok . and they get very upset . one of they , to his credit , I think really just want to engage I in a serious argument . but I do not engage in serious argument . I do not approve of they because argument , of course , be all about contradiction , and they be shape by the value that I have question with .     I have question with the value of newtonian science , like rationality . you be suppose to be rational in an argument . well rationality be construct by what christie hefner be talk about today , that mind - body split , you know ? the head be good , body bad . head be ego , body I d. when we say " I , " — as when rene descarte say , " I think therefore I be , " — we mean the head . and as david lee roth sing in " just a gigolo , " " I be not get no body . " that be how you get rationality . and that be why so much of humor be the body assert itself against the head . that be why you have toilet humor and sexual humor . that be why you have the raspyni brother whack richard in the genital area . and we be laugh doubly then because he be the body , but it be also —     voice offstage : richard .     emily levine : richard . what do I say ? ( laughter ) richard . yes but it be also the head , the head of the conference .     that be the other way that humor — like art buchwald take shot at the head of state . it do not make quite as much money as body humor I be sure — ( laughter ) but nevertheless , what make we treasure you and adore you .     there be also a contradiction in rationality in this country though , which be , as much as we revere the head , we be very anti - intellectual . I know this because I read in the new york times , the ayn rand foundation take out a full - page ad after september 11 , in which they say , " the problem be not iraq or iran , the problem in this country , face this country be the university professor and their spawn . " ( laughter ) so I go back and re - read " the fountainhead . " ( laughter ) I do not know how many of you have read it . and I be not an expert on sadomasochism . ( laughter ) but let I just read you a couple of random passage from page 217 .     " the act of a master take painful contemptuous possession of she , be the kind of rapture she want . when they lay together in bed it be , as it have to be , as the nature of the act demand , an act of violence . it be an act of clenched tooth and hatred . it be the unendurable . not a caress , but a wave of pain . the agony as an act of passion . "     so you can imagine my surprise on reading in the new yorker that alan greenspan , chairman of the federal reserve , claim ayn rand as his intellectual mentor . ( laughter ) it be like find out your nanny be a dominatrix . ( laughter ) bad enough we have to see j. edgar hoover in a dress . now we have to picture alan greenspan in a black leather corset , with a butt tattoo that say , " whip inflation now . "     ( laughter )     and ayn rand of course , ayn rand be famous for a philosophy call objectivism , which reflect another value of newtonian physic , which be objectivity . objectivity basically be construct in that same s&m way . it be the subject subjugate the object . that be how you assert yourself . you make yourself the active voice . and the object be the passive no - voice .     I be so fascinated by that oxygen commercial . I do not know if you know this but — maybe it be different now , or maybe you be make a statement — but in many hospital nursery across the country , until very recently anyway , accord to a book by jessica benjamin , the sign over the little boy crib read , " I be a boy , " and the sign over the little girl crib read , " it be a girl . " yeah . so the passivity be culturally project onto the little girl .     and this still go on as I think I tell you last year . there be a poll that prove — there be a poll that be give by time magazine , in which only man be ask , " have you ever have sex with a woman you actively dislike ? " and well , yeah . well , 58 percent say yes , which I think be overinflate though because so many man if you just say , " have you ever have sex ... " " yes ! " they do not even wait for the rest of it . ( laughter ) and of course two percent do not know whether they would have — ( laughter ) that be the first callback , of my attempted quadruple .     ( laughter )     so this subject - object thing , be part of something I be very interested in because this be why , frankly , I believe in political correctness . I do . I think it can go too far . I think ringle brother may have go too far with an ad they take out in the new york times magazine . " we have a lifelong emotional and financial commitment to our asian elephant partner . " ( laughter ) maybe too far . but you know — I do not think that a person of color make fun of white people be the same thing as a white person make fun of people of color . or woman make fun of man be the same as man make fun of woman . or poor people make fun of rich people , the same as rich people .     I think you can make fun of the have but not the have - not , which be why you do not see I make fun of kenneth lie and his charming wife . ( laughter ) what be funny about be down to four house ? ( laughter ) and I really learn this lesson during the sex scandal of the clinton administration or , or as I call they , the good ol' day . ( laughter ) when people I know , you know , people who consider themselves liberal , and everything else , be make fun of jennifer flower and paula jones . basically , they be make fun of they for be trailer trash or white trash . it seem , I suppose , a harmless prejudice and that you be not really hurt anybody . until you read , as I do , an ad in the los angeles times . " for sale : white trash compactor . " ( laughter )     so this whole subject - object thing have relevance to humor in this way . I read a book by a woman name amy richlin , who be the chair of the classic department at usc . and the book be call " the garden of priapus . "   and she say that roman humor mirror the construction of roman society . so that roman society be very top / bottom , as our be to some degree . and so be humor . there always have to be the butt of a joke . so it be always the satirist , like juvenal or martial , represent the audience , and he be go to make fun of the outsider , the person who do not share that subject status .     and in stand - up of course , the stand - up comedian be suppose to dominate the audience . a lot of heckling be the tension of try to make sure that the comedian be go to be able to dominate , and overcome the heckler . and I get good at that when I be in stand up . but I always hate it because they be dictate the term of the interaction , in the same way that engage in a serious argument determine the content , to some degree , of what you be talk about . and I be look for a form that do not have that . and so I want something that be more interactive . I know that word be so debase now by the use of it by internet marketer .     I really miss the old telemarketer now , I 'll tell you that . ( laughter ) I do , because at least there you stand a chance . you know ? I use to actually hang up on they . but then I read in " dear abby " that that be rude . so the next time that one call I let he get halfway through his spiel and then I say , " you sound sexy . " ( laughter ) he hang up on I !     ( laughter )     but the interactivity allow the audience to shape what you be go to do as much as you shape their experience of the world . and that be really what I be look for . and I be sort of , as I be start to analyze what exactly it be that I do , I read a book call " trickster make this world , " by lewis hyde . and it be like be psychoanalyze . I mean he have lay it all out . and then come to this conference , I realize that most everybody here share those same quality because really what trickster be be an agent of change . trickster be a change agent . and the quality that I be about to describe be the quality that make it possible to make change happen . and one of these be boundary crossing . I think this be what so , in fact , infuriate the scientist . but I like to cross boundary . I like to , as I say , talk about thing I know nothing about .     ( phone ringing )     I hope that be my agent , because you be not pay I anything .     ( laughter )     and I think it be good to talk about thing I know nothing about because I bring a fresh viewpoint to it , you know ? I be able to see the contradiction that you may not be able to see . like for instance a mime once — or a meme as he call himself . he be a very selfish meme . and he say that I have to show more respect because it take up to 18 year to learn how to do mime properly . and I say , " well , that be how you know only stupid people go into it . " ( laughter ) it only take two year to learn how to talk .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     and you know people , this be the problem with quote , objectivity , unquote . when you be only surround by people who speak the same vocabulary as you , or share the same set of assumption as you , you start to think that that be reality . like economist , you know , their definition of rational , that we all act out of our own economic self - interest . well , look at michael hawley , or look at dean kamen , or look at my grandmother .     my grandmother always act in other people 's interest , whether they want she to or not . ( laughter ) if they have have an olympic in martyrdom , my grandmother would have lose on purpose . ( laughter ) " no , you take the prize . you be young . I be old . who be go to see it ? where be I go ? I be go to die soon . "     ( laughter )     so that be one — this boundary crossing , this go - between which — fritz lante , be that his name , actually say that he be a go - between . that be an actual quality of the trickster . and another be , non - oppositional strategy . and this be instead of contradiction . where you deny the other person 's reality , you have paradox where you allow more than one reality to coexist ,     I think there be another philosophical construction . I be not sure what it be call . but my example of it be a sign that I see in a jewelry store . it say , " ear pierce while you wait . " ( laughter ) there the alternative just boggle the imagination . ( laughter ) " oh no . thank though , I 'll leave they here . thank very much . I have some errand to run . so I 'll be back to pick they up around five , if that be ok with you . huh ? huh ? what ? can not hear you . "     ( laughter )     and another attribute of the trickster be smart luck . that accident , that louis kahn , who talk about accident , this be another quality of the trickster . the trickster have a mind that be prepare for the unprepared . that , and I will say this to the scientist , that the trickster have the ability to hold his idea lightly so that he can let room in for new idea or to see the contradiction or the hide problem with his idea . I have no joke for that . I just want to put the scientist in their place . ( laughter )     but here be how I think I like to make change , and that be in make connection . this be what I tend to see almost more than contradiction . like the , what do you call those toe of the gecko ? you know , the toe of the gecko , curl and uncurling like the finger of michael moschen . I love connection .     like I 'll read that one of the two attribute of matter in the newtonian universe — there be two attribute of matter in the newtonian universe — one be space occupancy . matter take up space . I guess the more you matter the more space you take up , which explain the whole suv phenomenon . ( laughter ) and the other one though be impenetrability .     well , in ancient rome , impenetrability be the criterion of masculinity . masculinity depend on you be the active penetrator . and then , in economic , there be an active producer and a passive consumer , which explain why business always have to penetrate new market . well yeah , I mean why we force china to open her market . and do not that feel good ? ( laughter ) and now we be be penetrate . you know the biotech company be actually go inside we and plant their little flag on our gene . you know we be be penetrate . and I suspect , by someone who actively dislike we . ( laughter ) that be the second of the quadruple . yes of course you get that . thank you very much . I still have a way to go .     ( laughter )     and what I hope to do , when I make these connection , be short circuit people 's thinking . you know , make you not follow your usual train of association , but make you rewire . it literally — when people say about the shock of recognition , it be literally re - cognition , rewire how you think — I have a joke to go with this and I forget it . I be so sorry . I be get like the woman in that joke about —     have you hear this joke about the woman drive with her mother ? and the mother be elderly . and the mother go right through a red light . and the daughter do not want to say anything . she do not want to be like , " you be too old to drive . " and the mother go through a second red light . and the daughter say , as tactfully as possible , " mom , be you aware that you just go through two red light ? " and the mother say , " oh ! be I drive ? "     ( laughter )     and that be the shock of recognition at the shock of recognition . that complete the quadruple .     ( laughter )     I just want to say two more thing . one be , another characteristic of trickster be that the trickster have to walk this fine line . he have to have poise . and you know the big hurdle for I , in do what I do , be construct my performance so that it be prepared and unprepared . find the balance between those thing be always dangerous because you might tip off too much in the direction of unprepared . but be too prepared do not leave room for the accident to happen .     I be think about what moshe safdie say yesterday about beauty because in his book , hyde say that sometimes trickster can tip over into beauty . but to do that you have to lose all the other quality because once you be into beauty you be into a finished thing . you be into something that occupy space and inhabit time . it be an actual thing . and it be always extraordinary to see a thing of beauty . but if you do not do that , if you allow for the accident to keep on happen , you have the possibility of get on a wavelength . I like to think of what I do as a probability wave . when you go into beauty the probability wave collapse into one possibility . and I like to explore all the possibility in the hope that you 'll be on the wavelength of your audience .     and the one final quality I want to say about trickster be that he do not have a home . he be always on the road . I want to say to you richard , in closing , that in ted you 've create a home . and thank you for invite I into it . thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   the allosphere : it be a three - story metal sphere in an echo - free chamber . think of the allosphere as a large , dynamically vary digital microscope that be connect to a supercomputer . 20 researcher can stand on a bridge suspend inside of the sphere , and be completely immerse in their datum .     imagine if a team of physicist could stand inside of an atom and watch and hear electron spin . imagine if a group of sculptor could be inside of a lattice of atom and sculpt with their material . imagine if a team of surgeon could fly into the brain , as though it be a world , and see tissue as landscape , and hear blood density level as music . this be some of the research that you be go to see that we be undertake at the allosphere .     but first a little bit about this group of artist , scientist , and engineer that be work together . I be a composer , orchestrally - train , and the inventor of the allosphere . with my visual artist colleague , we map complex mathematical algorithm that unfold in time and space , visually and sonically . our scientist colleague be find new pattern in the information . and our engineering colleague be make one of the large dynamically vary computer in the world for this kind of data exploration . I be go to fly you into five research project in the allosphere that be go to take you from biological macroscopic datum all the way down to electron spin .     this first project be call the allobrain . and it be our attempt to quantify beauty by find which region of the brain be interactive while witness something beautiful . you be fly through the cortex of my colleague 's brain . our narrative here be real fmri datum that be map visually and sonically . the brain now a world that we can fly through and interact with . you see 12 intelligent computer agent , the little rectangle that be fly in the brain with you . they be mine blood density level . and they be report they back to you sonically . high density level mean more activity in that point of the brain . they be actually singe these density to you with high pitch map to high density .     we be now go to move from real biological datum to biogenerative algorithm that create artificial nature in our next artistic and scientific installation . in this artistic and scientific installation , biogenerative algorithm be help we to understand self - generation and growth : very important for simulation in the nanoscaled science . for artist , we be make new world that we can uncover and explore . these generative algorithm grow over time , and they interact and communicate as a swarm of insect . our researcher be interact with this datum by inject bacterial code , which be computer program , that allow these creature to grow over time . we be go to move now from the biological and the macroscopic world , down into the atomic world , as we fly into a lattice of atom . this be real afm — atomic force microscope — datum from my colleague in the solid state lighting and energy center . they 've discover a new bond , a new material for transparent solar cell .     we be fly through 2,000 lattice of atom — oxygen , hydrogen and zinc . you view the bond in the triangle . it be four blue zinc atom bond with one white hydrogen atom . you see the electron flow with the streamline we as artist have generate for the scientist . this be allow they to find the bond node in any lattice of atom . we think it make a beautiful structural art . the sound that you be hear be the actual emission spectrum of these atom . we 've map they into the audio domain , so they be singe to you . oxygen , hydrogen and zinc have their own signature . we be go to actually move even far down as we go from this lattice of atom to one single hydrogen atom .     we be work with our physicist colleague that have give we the mathematical calculation of the n - dimensional schrödinger equation in time . what you be see here right now be a superposition of an electron in the low three orbital of a hydrogen atom . you be actually hear and see the electron flow with the line . the white dot be the probability wave that will show you where the electron be in any give point of time and space in this particular three - orbital configuration . in a minute we be go to move to a two - orbital configuration , and you be go to notice a pulsing . and you be go to hear an undulation between the sound . this be actually a light emitter . as the sound start to pulse and contract , our physicist can tell when a photon be go to be emit .     they be start to find new mathematical structure in these calculation . and they be understand more about quantum mathematic . we be go to move even far down , and go to one single electron spin . this will be the final project that I show you . our colleague in the center for quantum computation and spintronic be actually measure with their laser decoherence in a single electron spin . we 've take this information and we 've make a mathematical model out of it . you be actually see and hear quantum information flow . this be very important for the next step in simulate quantum computer and information technology .     so these brief example that I 've show you give you an idea of the kind of work that we be do at the university of california , santa barbara , to bring together , art , science and engineering into a new age of math , science and art . we hope that all of you will come to see the allosphere . inspire we to think of new way that we can use this unique instrument that we 've create at santa barbara . thank you very much . ( applause )  
   I be here today , as june say , to talk about a project that my twin sister and I have be do for the past three and half year . we be crochet a coral reef . and it be a project that we 've actually be now join by hundred of people around the world , who be do it with we . indeed thousand of people have actually be involve in this project , in many of its different aspect . it be a project that now reach across three continent , and its root go into the field of mathematic , marine biology , feminine handicraft and environmental activism . it be true . it be also a project that in a very beautiful way , the development of this have actually parallel the evolution of life on earth , which be a particularly lovely thing to be say right here in february 2009 — which , as one of our previous speaker tell we , be the 200th anniversary of the birth of charles darwin .     all of this I be go to get to in the next 18 minute , I hope . but let I first begin by show you some picture of what this thing look like . just to give you an idea of scale , that installation there be about six foot across , and the tall model be about two or three foot high . this be some more image of it . that one on the right be about five foot high . the work involve hundred of different crochet model . and indeed there be now thousand and thousand of model that people have contribute all over the world as part of this . the totality of this project involve ten of thousand of hour of human labor — 99 percent of it do by woman . on the right hand side , that bit there be part of an installation that be about 12 foot long .     my sister and I start this project in 2005 because in that year , at least in the science press , there be a lot of talk about global warming , and the effect that global warming be have on coral reef . coral be very delicate organism , and they be devastate by any rise in sea temperature . it cause these vast bleach event that be the first sign of coral of be sick . and if the bleaching do not go away — if the temperature do not go down — reef start to die . a great deal of this have be happen in the great barrier reef , particularly in coral reef all over the world . this be our invocation in crochet of a bleached reef .     we have a new organization together call the institute for figuring , which be a little organization we start to promote , to do project about the aesthetic and poetic dimension of science and mathematic . and I go and put a little announcement up on our site , ask for people to join we in this enterprise . to our surprise , one of the first people who call be the andy warhol museum . and they say they be have an exhibition about artist ' response to global warming , and they would like our coral reef to be part of it . I laugh and say , " well we 've only just start it , you can have a little bit of it . " so in 2007 we have an exhibition , a small exhibition of this crochet reef . and then some people in chicago come along and they say , " in late 2007 , the theme of the chicago humanities festival be global warming . and we 've get this 3,000 square - foot gallery and we want you to fill it with your reef . " and I , naively by this stage , say , " oh , yes , sure . " now I say " naively " because actually my profession be as a science writer . what I do be I write book about the cultural history of physics . I 've write book about the history of space , the history of physics and religion , and I write article for people like the new york times and the l.a . time . so I have no idea what it mean to fill a 3,000 square - foot gallery . so I say yes to this proposition . and I go home , and I tell my sister christine . and she nearly have a fit because christine be a professor at one of l.a . 's major art college , calart , and she know exactly what it mean to fill a 3,000 square - foot gallery . she think I would go off my head . but she go into crochet overdrive . and to cut a long story short , eight month later we do fill the chicago cultural center 's 3,000 square foot gallery .     by this stage the project have take on a viral dimension of its own , which get completely beyond we . the people in chicago decide that as well as exhibit our reef , what they want to do be have the local people there make a reef . so we go and teach the technique . we do workshop and lecture . and the people in chicago make a reef of their own . and it be exhibit alongside ours . there be hundred of people involve in that . we got invite to do the whole thing in new york , and in london , and in los angeles . in each of these city , the local citizen , hundred and hundred of they , have make a reef . and more and more people get involve in this , most of whom we 've never meet . so the whole thing have sort of morph into this organic , ever - evolve creature , that be actually go way beyond christine and i.     now some of you be sit here think , " what planet be these people on ? why on earth be you crochet a reef ? woolenness and wetness be not exactly two concept that go together . why not chisel a coral reef out of marble ? cast it in bronze . " but it turn out there be a very good reason why we be crochet it because many organism in coral reef have a very particular kind of structure . the frilly crenulate form that you see in coral , and kelp , and sponge and nudibranch , be a form of geometry know as hyperbolic geometry . and the only way that mathematician know how to model this structure be with crochet . it happen to be a fact . it be almost impossible to model this structure any other way , and it be almost impossible to do it on computer . so what be this hyperbolic geometry that coral and sea slug embody ?     the next few minute be , we be all go to get raise up to the level of a sea slug . ( laughter ) this sort of geometry revolutionize mathematic when it be first discover in the 19th century . but not until 1997 do mathematician actually understand how they could model it . in 1997 a mathematician at cornell , daina taimina , make the discovery that this structure could actually be do in knitting and crochet . the first one she do be knit . but you get too many stitch on the needle . so she quickly realize crochet be the well thing . but what she be do be actually make a model of a mathematical structure , that many mathematician have think it be actually impossible to model . and indeed they think that anything like this structure be impossible per se . some of the good mathematician spend hundred of year try to prove that this structure be impossible .     so what be this impossible hyperbolic structure ? before hyperbolic geometry , mathematician know about two kind of space : euclidean space , and spherical space . and they have different property . mathematician like to characterize thing by be formalist . you all have a sense of what a flat space be , euclidean space be . but mathematician formalize this in a particular way . and what they do be , they do it through the concept of parallel line . so here we have a line and a point outside the line . and euclid say , " how can I define parallel line ? I ask the question , how many line can I draw through the point but never meet the original line ? " and you all know the answer . do someone want to shout it out ? one . great . okay . that be our definition of a parallel line . it be a definition really of euclidean space .     but there be another possibility that you all know of : spherical space . think of the surface of a sphere — just like a beach ball , the surface of the earth . I have a straight line on my spherical surface . and I have a point outside the line . how many straight line can I draw through the point but never meet the original line ? what do we mean to talk about a straight line on a curved surface ? now mathematicians have answer that question . they 've understand there be a generalize concept of straightness , it be call a geodesic . and on the surface of a sphere , a straight line be the big possible circle you can draw . so it be like the equator or the line of longitude . so we ask the question again , " how many straight line can I draw through the point , but never meet the original line ? " do someone want to guess ? zero . very good .     now mathematicians think that be the only alternative . it be a bit suspicious be not it ? there be two answer to the question so far , zero and one . two answer ? there may possibly be a third alternative . to a mathematician if there be two answer , and the first two be zero and one , there be another number that immediately suggest itself as the third alternative . do anyone want to guess what it be ? infinity . you all get it right . exactly . there be , there be a third alternative . this be what it look like . there be a straight line , and there be an infinite number of line that go through the point and never meet the original line . this be the drawing . this nearly drive mathematician bonker because , like you , they be sit there feel bamboozled . think , how can that be ? you be cheat . the line be curve . but that be only because I be project it onto a flat surface . mathematician for several hundred year have to really struggle with this . how could they see this ? what do it mean to actually have a physical model that look like this ?     it be a bit like this : imagine that we have only ever encounter euclidean space . then our mathematician come along and say , " there be this thing call a sphere , and the line come together at the north and south pole . " but you do not know what a sphere look like . and someone that come along and say , " look here be a ball . " and you go , " ah ! I can see it . I can feel it . I can touch it . I can play with it . " and that be exactly what happen when daina taimina in 1997 , show that you could crochet model in hyperbolic space . here be this diagram in crochetness . I 've stitch euclid 's parallel postulate on to the surface . and the line look curve . but look , I can prove to you that they be straight because I can take any one of these line , and I can fold along it . and it be a straight line . so here , in wool , through a domestic feminine art , be the proof that the most famous postulate in mathematics be wrong . ( applause )     and you can stitch all sort of mathematical theorem onto these surface . the discovery of hyperbolic space usher in the field of mathematic that be call non - euclidean geometry . and this be actually the field of mathematic that underlie general relativity and be actually ultimately go to show we about the shape of the universe . so there be this direct line between feminine handicraft , euclid and general relativity .     now , I say that mathematician think that this be impossible . here be two creature who 've never hear of euclid 's parallel postulate — do not know it be impossible to violate , and they be simply get on with it . they 've be do it for hundred of million of year . I once ask the mathematician why it be that mathematician think this structure be impossible when sea slug have be do it since the silurian age . their answer be interesting . they say , " well I guess there be not that many mathematician sit around look at sea slug . " and that be true . but it also go deep than that . it also say a whole lot of thing about what mathematician think mathematic be , what they think it could and could not do , what they think it could and could not represent . even mathematician , who in some sense be the free of all thinker , literally could not see not only the sea slug around they , but the lettuce on their plate — because lettuce , and all those curly vegetable , they also be embodiment of hyperbolic geometry . and so in some sense they literally , they have such a symbolic view of mathematic , they could not actually see what be go on on the lettuce in front of they . it turn out that the natural world be full of hyperbolic wonder .     and so , too , we 've discover that there be an infinite taxonomy of crochet hyperbolic creature . we start out , chrissy and I and our contributor , do the simple mathematically perfect model . but we find that when we deviate from the specific setness of the mathematical code that underlie it — the simple algorithm crochet three , increase one — when we deviate from that and make embellishment to the code , the model immediately start to look more natural . and all of our contributor , who be an amazing collection of people around the world , do their own embellishment . as it be , we have this ever - evolve , crochet taxonomic tree of life . just as the morphology and the complexity of life on earth be never end , little embellishment and complexification in the dna code lead to new thing like giraffe , or orchid — so too , do little embellishment in the crochet code lead to new and wondrous creature in the evolutionary tree of crochet life . so this project really have take on this inner organic life of its own . there be the totality of all the people who have come to it . and their individual vision , and their engagement with this mathematical mode .     we have these technology . we use they . but why ? what be at stake here ? what do it matter ? for chrissy and I , one of the thing that be important here be that these thing suggest the importance and value of embody knowledge . we live in a society that completely tend to valorize symbolic form of representation — algebraic representation , equation , code . we live in a society that be obsess with present information in this way , teach information in this way . but through this sort of modality , crochet , other plastic form of play — people can be engage with the most abstract , high - power , theoretical idea , the kind of idea that normally you have to go to university department to study in high mathematic , which be where I first learn about hyperbolic space . but you can do it through play with material object . one of the way that we 've come to think about this be that what we be try to do with the institute for figuring and project like this , we be try to have kindergarten for grown - up .     and kindergarten be actually a very formalized system of education , establish by a man name friedrich froebel , who be a crystallographer in the 19th century . he believe that the crystal be the model for all kind of representation . he develop a radical alternative system of engage the small child with the most abstract idea through physical form of play . and he be worthy of an entire talk on his own right . the value of education be something that froebel champion , through plastic mode of play .     we live in a society now where we have lot of think tank , where great mind go to think about the world . they write these great symbolic treatise call book , and paper , and op - ed article . we want to propose , chrissy and I , through the institute for figuring , another alternative way of do thing , which be the play tank . and the play tank , like the think tank , be a place where people can go and engage with great idea . but what we want to propose , be that the high level of abstraction , thing like mathematic , computing , logic , etc . — all of this can be engage with , not just through purely cerebral algebraic symbolic method , but by literally , physically play with idea . thank you very much . ( applause )  
   I should tell you that when I be ask to be here , I think to myself that well , it be ted . and these tedster be — you know , as innocent as that name sound — these be the philanthropist and artist and scientist who sort of shape our world . and what could I possibly have to say that would be distinguish enough to justify my participation in something like that ? and so I think perhaps a really civilize - sound british accent might help thing a bit .     and then I think no , no . I should just get up there and be myself and just talk the way I really talk because , after all , this be the great unveiling . and so I think I would come up here and unveil my real voice to you . although many of you already know that I do speak the queen 's english because I be from queen , new york . ( laughter ) but the theme of this session , of course , be invention . and while I do not have any patent that I be aware of , you will be meet a few of my invention today . I suppose it be fair to say that I be interested in the invention of self or self . we be all bear into certain circumstance with particular physical trait , unique developmental experience , geographical and historical context . but then what ? to what extent do we self - construct , do we self - invent ? how do we self - identify and how mutable be that identity ? like , what if one could be anyone at any time ? well my character , like the one in my show , allow I to play with the space between those question . and so I 've bring a couple of they with I . and well , they be very excited . what I should tell you — what I should tell you be that they 've each prepare their own little ted talk . so feel free to think of this as sarah university . ( laughter )     okay . okay . oh , well . oh , wonderful . good evening everybody . thank you so very much for have I here today . ah , thank you very much . my name be lorraine levine . oh my ! there be so many of you . hi sweetheart . okay . ( laughter ) anyway , I be here because of a young girl , sarah jones . she be a very nice , young black girl . well you know , she call herself black — she be really more like a caramel color if you look at she . but anyway . ( laughter ) she have I here because she put I in her show , what she call her one - woman show . and you know what that mean , of course . that mean she take the credit and then make we come out here and do all the work . but I do not mind .     frankly , I be kvelle just to be here with all the luminary you have attend something like this , you know . really , it be amazing . not only , of course , the scientist and all the wonderful giant of the industry but the celebrity . there be so many celebrity run around here . I see — glenn close I see early . I love she . and she be get a yogurt in the google cafe . be not that adorable ? ( laughter ) so many other you see , they be just wonderful . it be lovely to know they be concern , you know . and — oh , I see goldie hawn . oh , goldie hawn . I love she , too ; she be wonderful . yeah . you know , she be only half jewish . do you know that about she ? yeah . but even so , a wonderful talent . ( laughter ) and I — you know , when I see she , such a wonderful feeling . yeah , she be lovely . but anyway , I should have start by say just how lucky I feel . it be such an eye - open experience to be here . you be all so responsible for this world that we live in today . you know , I could not have dream of such a thing as a young girl . and you 've all make these advancement happen in such a short time — you be all so young . you know , your parent must be very proud .     but I — I also appreciate the diversity that you have here . I notice it be very multicultural . you know , when you be stand up here , you can see all the different people . it be like a rainbow . it be okay to say rainbow . yeah . I just — I can not keep up with whether you can say , you know , the different thing . what be you allow to say or not say ? I just — I do not want to offend anybody . you know . but anyway , you know , I just think that to be here with all of you accomplish young people — literally , some of you , the architect build our bright future . you know , it be hearten to I . even though , quite frankly , some of your presentation be horrify , absolutely horrifying . it be true . it be true . you know , between the environmental degradation and the crashing of the world market you be talk about . and of course , we know it be all because of the — all the ... well , I do not know how else to say it to you , so I 'll just say it my way : the ganeyvish schticklich come from the government and the , you know , the banker and the wall street . you know it . anyway . ( laughter )     the point be , I be happy somebody have practical idea to get we out of this mess . so I salute each of you and your stellar achievement . thank you for all that you do . and congratulation on be such big makher that you 've become ted meister . so , happy continued success . congratulation . mazel tov . ( applause )     hi . hi . thank you everybody . sorry , this be such a wonderful opportunity and everything , to be here right now . my name be noraida . and I be just — I be so thrilled to be part of like your ted conference that you be do and everything like that . I be dominican - american . actually , you could say I grow up in the capital of dominican republic , otherwise know as washington height in new york city . but I do not know if there be any other dominican people here , but I know that juan enriquez , he be here yesterday . and I think he be mexican , so that be — honestly , that be close enough for I right now . so — ( laughter )     I just — I be sorry . I be just try not to be nervous because this be a very wonderful experience for I and everything . and I just — you know I be not use to do the public speaking . and whenever I get nervous I start to talk really fast . nobody can understand nothing I be say , which be very frustrating for I , as you can imagine . I usually have to just like try to calm down and take a deep breath . but then on top of that , you know , sarah jones tell I we only have 18 minute . so then I be like , should I be nervous , you know , because maybe it be well . and I be just try not to panic and freak out . so I like , take a deep breath .     okay . sorry . so anyway , what I be try to say be that I really love ted . like , I love everything about this . it be amazing . like , it be — I can not get over this right now . and , like , people would not believe , seriously , where I be from , that this even exist . you know , like even , I mean I love like the name , the — ted . I mean I know it be a real person and everything , but I be just say that like , you know , I think it be very cool how it be also an acronym , you know , which be like , you know , be like very high concept and everything like that . I like that .     and actually , I can relate to the whole like acronym thing and everything . because , actually , I be a sophomore at college right now . at my school — actually I be part of co - found an organization , which be like a leadership thing , you know , like you guy , you would really like it and everything . and the organization be call da bomb , a\and da bomb — not like what you guy can build and everything — it be like , da bomb , it mean like dominican — it be an acronym — dominican - american benevolent organization for mother and baby . so , I know , see , like the name be like a little bit long , but with the war on terror and everything , the dean of student activity have ask we to stop say da bomb and use the whole thing so nobody would get the wrong idea , whatever . so , basically like da bomb — what dominican - american benevolent organization for mother and baby do be , basically , we try to advocate for student who show a lot of academic promise and who also happen to be mother like I . I be a work mother , and I also go to school full - time . and , you know , it be like — it be so important to have like role model out there . I mean , I know sometimes our lifestyle be very different , whatever .     but like even at my job — like , I just got promote . right now it be very exciting actually for I because I be the junior assistant to the associate director under the senior vice president for business development — that be my new title . so , but I think whether you own your own company or you be just start out like I , like something like this be so vital for people to just continue expand their mind and learn . and if everybody , like all people really have access to that , it would be a very different world out there , as I know you know . so , I think all people , we need that , but especially , I look at people like I , you know like , I mean , latinos — we be about to be the majority , in like two week . so , we deserve just as much to be part of the exchange of idea as everybody else . so , I be very happy that you be , you know , do this kind of thing , make the talk available online . that be very good . I love that . and I just — I love you guy . I love te . and if you do not mind , privately now , in the future , I be go to think of ted as an acronym for technology , entertainment and dominican . thank you very much . ( laughter ) ( applause )     so , that be noraida , and just like lorraine and everybody else you be meet today , these be folk who be base on real people from my real life : friend , neighbor , family member . I come from a multicultural family . in fact , the old lady you just meet : very , very loosely base on a great aunt on my mother 's side . it be a long story , believe I . but on top of my family background , my parent also send I to the united nations school , where I encounter a plethora of new character , include alexandre , my french teacher , okay .     well , you know , it be beginner french , that I be take with she , you know . and it be madame bousson , you know , she be very [ french ] . it be like , you know , she be there in the class , you know , she be kind of typically french . you know , she be very chic , but she be very fill with ennui , you know . and she would be there , you know , kind of talk with the class , you know , talk about the , you know , the existential futility of life , you know . and we be only 11 year old , so it be not appropriate . ( laughter )     but [ german ] . yes , I take german for three year , [ german ] , and it be quite the experience because I be the only black girl in the class , even in the un school . although , you know , it be wonderful . the teacher , herr schtopf , he never discriminate . never . he always , always treat each of we , you know , equally unbearably during the class .     so , there be the teacher and then there be my friend , classmate from everywhere , many of whom be still dear friend to this day . and they 've inspire many character as well . for example , a friend of mine .     well , I just want to quickly say good evening . my name be praveen manvi and thank you very much for this opportunity . of course , ted , the reputation precede itself all over the world . but , you know , I be originally from india , and I want to start by tell you that once sarah jones tell I that we will be have the opportunity to come here to ted in california , originally , I be very pleased and , frankly , relieve because , you know , I be a human right advocate . and usually my work , it take I to washington d.c . and there , I must attend these meeting , mingle with some tiresome politician , try to make I feel comfortable by tell how often they be eat the curry in georgetown . ( laughter ) so , you can just imagine — right . so , but I be thrilled to be join all of you here . I wish we have more time together , but that be for another time . okay ? great . ( applause )     and , sadly , I do not think we 'll have time for you to meet everybody I bring , but — I be try to behave myself , it be my first time here . but I do want to introduce you to a couple of folk you may recognize , if you see " bridge and tunnel . "     uh , well , thank you . good evening . my name be pauline ning , and first I want to tell you that I be — of course I be a member of the chinese community in new york . but when sarah jones ask I to please come to ted , I say , well , you know , first , I do not know that , you know — before two year ago , you would not find I in front of an audience of people , much less like this because I do not like to give speech because I feel that , as an immigrant , I do not have good english skill for speak . but then , I decide , just like governor arnold schwarzenegger , I try anyway . ( laughter ) my daughter — my daughter write that , she tell I , " always start your speech with humor . "     but my background — I want to tell you story only briefly . my husband and I , we bring our son and daughter here in 1980 to have the freedom we can not have in china at that time . and we try to teach our kid to be proud of their tradition , but it be very hard . you know , as immigrant , I would speak chinese to they , and they would always answer I back in english . they love rock music , pop culture , american culture . but when they get old , when the time come for they to start think about getting marry , that be when we expect they to realize , a little bit more , their own culture . but that be where we have some problem . my son , he say he be not ready to get marry . and he have a sweetheart , but she be american woman , not chinese . it be not that it be bad , but I tell he , " what be wrong with a chinese woman ? " but I think he will change his mind soon .     so , then I decide instead , I will concentrate on my daughter . the daughter 's marriage be very special to the mom . but first , she say she be not interested . she only want to spend time with her friend . and then at college , it be like she never come home . and she do not want I to come and visit . so I say , " what be wrong in this picture ? " so , I accuse my daughter to have like a secret boyfriend . but she tell I , " mom , you do not have to worry about boy because I do not like they . " ( laughter ) and I say , " yes , man can be difficult , but all woman have to get use to that . " she say , " no mom . I mean , I do not like boy . I like girl . I be lesbian . " so , I always teach my kid to respect american idea , but I tell my daughter that this be one exception — ( laughter ) — that she be not gay , she be just confuse by this american problem . but she tell I , " mom , it be not american . " she say she be in love — in love with a nice chinese girl . ( laughter ) so , these be the word I be wait to hear , but from my son , not my daughter . ( laughter ) but at first I do not know what to do . but then , over time , I have come to understand that this be who she be .     so , even though sometimes it be still hard , I will share with you that it help I to realize society be more tolerant , usually because of place like this , because of idea like this , and people like you , with an open mind . so I think maybe te , you impact people 's life in the way maybe even you do not realize . so , for my daughter 's sake , I thank you for your idea worth spread . thank you . xie xie . ( applause )     good evening . my name be habbi belahal . and I would like to first of all thank sarah jones for put all of the pressure on the only arab who she bring with she to be last today . I be originally from jordan . and I teach comparative literature at queens college . it be not harvard . but I feel a bit like a fish out of water . but I be very proud of my student . and I see that a few of they do make it here to the conference . so you will get the extra credit I promise you . but , while I know that I may not look like the typical ted - izen , as you would say , I do like to make the point that we in global society , we be never as different as the appearance may suggest .     so , if you will indulge I , I will share quickly with you a bit of verse , which I memorize as a young girl at 16 year of age . so , back in the ancient time . [ arabic ] and this roughly translate : " please , let I hold your hand . I want to hold your hand . I want to hold your hand . and when I touch you , I feel happy inside . it be such a feeling that my love , I can not hide , I can not hide , I can not hide . " well , so okay , but please , please , but please . if it be sound familiar , it be because I be at the same time in my life listen to the beatle . on the radio [ unclear ] , they be very popular .     so , all of that be to say that I like to believe that for every word intend as to render we deaf to one another , there be always a lyric connect ear and heart across the continent in rhyme . and I pray that this be the way that we will self - invent , in time . that be all , shukran . thank you very much for the opportunity . okay ? great . ( applause )     thank you all very much . it be lovely . thank you for have I . ( applause ) thank you very , very much . I love you . ( applause ) well , you have to let I say this . I just — thank you . I want to thank chris and jacqueline , and just everyone for have I here . it be be a long time come , and I feel like I be home . and I know I 've perform for some of your company or some of you have see I elsewhere , but this be honestly one of the good audience I 've ever experience . the whole thing be amazing , and so do not you all go reinvent yourself any time soon . ( applause )  
so the first question be , why do we need to even worry about a pandemic threat ? what be it that we be concerned about ? when I say " we , " I be at the council on foreign relation . we be concerned in the national security community , and of course in the biology community and the public health community . while globalization have increase travel , it be make it necessary that everybody be everywhere , all the time , all over the world . and that mean that your microbial hitchhiker be move with you . so a plague outbreak in surat , india become not an obscure event , but a globalized event — a globalized concern that have change the risk equation . katrina show we that we can not completely depend on government to have readiness in hand , to be capable of handle thing . indeed , an outbreak would be multiple katrina at once .     our big concern at the moment be a virus call h5n1 flu — some of you call it bird flu — which first emerge in southern china , in the mid-1990 , but we do not know about it until 1997 . at the end of last christmas only 13 country have see h5n1 . but we be now up to 55 country in the world , have have this virus emerge , in either bird , or people or both . in the bird outbreak we now can see that pretty much the whole world have see this virus except the america . and I 'll get into why we 've so far be spare in a moment .     in domestic bird , especially chicken , it be 100 percent lethal . it be one of the most lethal thing we 've see in circulation in the world in any recent century . and we 've deal with it by kill off lot and lot and lot of chicken , and unfortunately often not reimburse the peasant farmer with the result that there be cover - up . it be also carry on migration pattern of wild migratory aquatic bird . there have be this centralized event in a place call lake chenghai , china . two year ago the migrating bird have a multiple event where thousand die because of a mutation occur in the virus , which make the specie range broaden dramatically . so that bird go to siberia , to europe , and to africa carry the virus , which have not previously be possible .     we be now see outbreak in human population — so far , fortunately , small event , tiny outbreak , occasional cluster . the virus have mutate dramatically in the last two year to form two distinct family , if you will , of the h5n1 viral tree with branch in they , and with different attribute that be worry . so what be concern we ? well , first of all , at no time in history have we succeed in make in a timely fashion , a specific vaccine for more than 260 million people . it be not go to do we very much good in a global pandemic . you 've hear about the vaccine we be stockpile . but nobody believe it will actually be particularly effective if we have a real outbreak .     so one thought be : after 9/11 , when the airport close , our flu season be delay by two week . so the thought be , hey , maybe what we should do be just immediately — we hear there be h5n1 spread from human to human , the virus have mutate to be a human - to - human transmitter — let us shut down the airport . however , huge supercomputer analysis , do of the likely effectiveness of this , show that it will not buy we much time at all . and of course it will be hugely disruptive in preparation plan . for example , all mask be make in china . how do you get they mobilize around the world if you 've shut all the airport down ? how do you get the vaccine move around the world and the drug move , and whatever may or not be available that would work . so it turn out that shut down the airport be counterproductive .     we be worried because this virus , unlike any other flu we 've ever study , can be transmit by eat raw meat of the infected animal . we 've see transmission to wild cat and domestic cat , and now also domestic pet dog . and in experimental feeding to rodent and ferret , we find that the animal exhibit symptom never see with flu : seizure , central nervous system disorder , partial paralysis . this be not your normal garden - variety flu . it mimic what we now understand about reconstruct the 1918 flu virus , the last great pandemic , in that it also jump directly from bird to people . we have evolution over time , and this unbelievable mortality rate in human being : 55 percent of people who have become infect with h5n1 have , in fact , succumb . and we do not have a huge number of people who got infect and never develop disease .     in experimental feeding in monkey you can see that it actually downregulate a specific immune system modulator . the result be that what kill you be not the virus directly , but your own immune system overreact , say , " whatever this be so foreign I be go berserk . " the result : most of the death have be in people under 30 year of age , robustly healthy young adult . we have see human - to - human transmission in at least three cluster — fortunately involve very intimate contact , still not put the world at large at any kind of risk .     alright , so I 've get you nervous . now you probably assume , well the government be go to do something . and we have spend a lot of money . most of the spending in the bush administration have actually be more related to the anthrax result and bio - terrorism threat . but a lot of money have be throw out at the local level and at the federal level to look at infectious disease . end result : only 15 state have be certify to be able to do mass distribution of vaccine and drug in a pandemic . half the state would run out of hospital bed in the first week , maybe two week . and 40 state already have an acute nursing shortage . add on pandemic threat , you be in big trouble .     so what have people be do with this money ? exercise , drill , all over the world . let us pretend there be a pandemic . let us everybody run around and play your role . main result be that there be tremendous confusion . most of these people do not actually know what their job will be . and the bottom line , major thing that have come through in every single drill : nobody know who be in charge . nobody know the chain of command . if it be los angeles , be it the mayor , the governor , the president of the united states , the head of homeland security ? in fact , the federal government say it be a guy call the principle federal officer , who happen to be with tsa .     the government say the federal responsibility will basically be about try to keep the virus out , which we all know be impossible , and then to mitigate the impact primarily on our economy . the rest be up to your local community . everything be about your town , where you live . well how good a city council you have , how good a mayor you have — that be who be go to be in charge . most local facility would all be compete to try and get their hand on their piece of the federal stockpile of a drug call tamiflu , which may or may not be helpful — I 'll get into that — of available vaccine , and any other treatment , and mask , and anything that be be stockpile . and you 'll have massive competition . now we do purchase a vaccine , you 've you all hear about it , make by sanofi - aventis . unfortunately it be make against the current form of h5n1 . we know the virus will mutate . it will be a different virus . the vaccine will probably be useless . so here be where the decision come in .     you be the mayor of your local town . let us see , should we order that all pet be keep indoor ? germany do that when h5n1 appear in germany last year , in order to minimize the spread between household by household cat , dog and so on . what do we do when we do not have any containment room with reverse air that will allow the healthcare worker to take care of patient ? these be in hong kong ; we have nothing like that here . what about quarantine ? during the sars epidemic in beijing quarantine do seem to help . we have no uniform policy regard quarantine across the united states . and some state have differential policy , county by county . but what about the no - brainer thing ? should we close all the school ? well then what about all the worker ? they will not go to work if their kid be not in school . encourage telecommuting ? what work ?     well the british government do a model of telecommuting . six week they have all people in the banking industry pretend a pandemic be underway . what they find be , the core function — you know you still sort of have bank , but you could not get people to put money in the atm machine . nobody be process the credit card . your insurance payment do not go through . and basically the economy would be in a disaster state of affair . and that be just office worker , banker .     we do not know how important hand washing be for flu — shocking . one assume it be a good idea to wash your hand a lot . but actually in scientific community there be great debate about what percentage of flu transmission between people be from sneeze and coughing and what percentage be on your hand . the institute of medicine try to look at the masking question . can we figure out a way , since we know we will not have enough mask because we do not make they in america anymore , they be all make in china — do we need n95 ? a state - of - the - art , top - of - the - line , must - be - fit - to - your - face mask ? or can we get away with some different kind of mask ? in the sars epidemic , we learn in hong kong that most of transmission be because people be remove their mask improperly . and their hand got contaminate with the outside of the mask , and then they rub their nose . bingo ! they get sars . it be not fly microbe . if you go online right now , you 'll get so much phony - baloney information . you 'll end up buy — this be call an n95 mask . ridiculous . we do not actually have a standard for what should be the protective gear for the first responder , the people who will actually be there on the front line .     and tamiflu . you 've probably hear of this drug , make by hoffmann - la roche , patented drug . there be some indication that it may buy you some time in the midst of an outbreak . should you take tamiflu for a long period of time , well , one of the side effect be suicidal ideation . a public health survey analyze the effect that large - scale tamiflu use would have , actually show it counteractive to public health measure , make matter bad . and here be the other interesting thing : when a human being ingest tamiflu , only 20 percent be metabolize appropriately to be an active compound in the human being . the rest turn into a stable compound , which survive filtration into the water system , thereby expose the very aquatic bird that would carry flu and provide they a chance to breed resistant strain . and we now have see tamiflu - resistant strain in both vietnam in person - to - person transmission , and in egypt in person - to - person transmission . so I personally think that our life expectancy for tamiflu as an effective drug be very limited — very limited indeed .     nevertheless most of the government have base their whole flu policy on building stockpile of tamiflu . russia have actually stockpile enough for 95 percent of all russian . we 've stockpile enough for 30 percent . when I say enough , that be two week worth . and then you be on your own because the pandemic be go to last for 18 to 24 month . some of the poor country that have have the most experience with h5n1 have build up stockpile ; they be already expire . they be already out of date . what do we know from 1918 , the last great pandemic ? the federal government abdicate most responsibility . and so we end up with this wild patchwork of regulation all over america . every city , county , state do their own thing . and the rule and the belief system be wildly disparate . in some case all school , all church , all public venue be closed .     the pandemic circulate three time in 18 month in the absence of commercial air travel . the second wave be the mutate , super - killer wave . and in the first wave we have enough healthcare worker . but by the time the second wave hit it take such a toll among the healthcare worker that we lose most of our doctor and nurse that be on the front line . overall we lose 700,000 people . the virus be 100 percent lethal to pregnant woman and we do not actually know why . most of the death toll be 15 to 40 year - old — robustly healthy young adult . it be liken to the plague . we do not actually know how many people die . the low - ball estimate be 35 million . this be base on european and north american data .     a new study by chris murray at harvard show that if you look at the database that be keep by the brit in india , there be a 31 - fold great death rate among the indian . so there be a strong belief that in place of poverty the death toll be far high . and that a more likely toll be somewhere in the neighborhood of 80 to 100 million people before we have commercial air travel . so be we ready ? as a nation , no we be not . and I think even those in the leadership would say that be the case , that we still have a long way to go .     so what do that mean for you ? well the first thing be , I would not start build up personal stockpile of anything — for yourself , your family , or your employee — unless you 've really do your homework . what mask work , what mask do not work . how many mask do you need ? the institute of medicine study feel that you could not recycle mask . well if you think it be go to last 18 month , be you go to buy 18 month worth of mask for every single person in your family ?     we do not know — again with tamiflu , the number one side effect of tamiflu be flu - like symptom . so then how can you tell who in your family have the flu if everybody be take tamiflu ? if you expand that out to think of a whole community , or all your employee in your company , you begin to realize how limited the tamiflu option might be . everybody have come up to I and say , well I 'll stockpile water or , I 'll stockpile food , or what have you . but really ? do you really have a place to stockpile 18 month worth of food ? twenty - four month worth of food ? do you want to view the pandemic threat the way back in the 1950s people view the civil defense issue , and build your own little bomb shelter for pandemic flu ? I do not think that be rational .     I think it be about have to be prepare as community , not as individual — be prepare as nation , be prepare as state , be prepare as town . and right now most of the preparedness be deeply flawed . and I hope I 've convince you of that , which mean that the real job be go out and say to your local leader , and your national leader , " why have not you solve these problem ? why be you still think that the lesson of katrina do not apply to flu ? " and put the pressure where the pressure need to be put . but I guess the other thing to add be , if you do have employee , and you do have a company , I think you have certain responsibility to demonstrate that you be think ahead for they , and you be try to plan . at a minimum the british banking plan show that telecommuting can be helpful . it probably do reduce exposure because people be not come into the office and cough on each other , or touch common object and share thing via their hand . but can you sustain your company that way ? well if you have a dot - com , maybe you can . otherwise you be in trouble . happy to take your question . ( applause )     audience member : what factor determine the duration of a pandemic ?     laurie garret : what factor determine the duration of a pandemic , we do not really know . I could give you a bunch of flip , this , that , and the other . but I would say that honestly we do not know . clearly the bottom line be the virus eventually attenuate , and cease to be a lethal virus to humanity , and find other host . but we do not really know how and why that happen . it be a very complicated ecology .     audience member : what kind of trigger be you look for ? you know way more than any of we . to say ahh , if this happen then we be go to have a pandemic ?     lg : the moment that you see any evidence of serious human - to - human to transmission . not just intimately between family member who take care of an ail sister or brother , but a community infect — spread within a school , spread within a dormitory , something of that nature . then I think that there be universal agreement now , at who all the way down : send out the alert .     audience member : some research have indicate that statin can be helpful . can you talk about that ?     lg : yeah . there be some evidence that take lipitor and other common statin for cholesterol control may decrease your vulnerability to influenza . but we do not completely understand why . the mechanism be not clear . and I do not know that there be any way responsibly for someone to start medicate their child with their personal supply of lipitor or something of that nature . we have absolutely no idea what that would do . you might be cause some very dangerous outcome in your child , do such a thing .     audience member : how far along be we in be able to determine whether someone be actually carry , whether somebody have this before the symptom be full - blow ?     lg : right . so I have for a long time say that what we really need be a rapid diagnostic . and our center for disease control have label a test they develop a rapid diagnostic . it take 24 hour in a very highly develop laboratory , in highly skilled hand . I be think dipstick . you could do it to your own kid . it change color . it tell you if you have h5n1 . in term of where we be in science with dna identification capacity and so on , it be not that far off . but we be not there . and there have not be the kind of investment to get we there .     audience member : in the 1918 flu I understand that they theorize that there be some attenuation of the virus when it make the leap into human . be that likely , do you think , here ? I mean 100 percent death rate be pretty severe .     lg : um yeah . so we do not actually know what the lethality be of the 1918 strain to wild bird before it jump from bird to human . it be curious that there be no evidence of mass die - off of chicken or household bird across america before the human pandemic happen . that may be because those event be occur on the other side of the world where nobody be pay attention . but the virus clearly go through one round around the world in a mild enough form that the british army in world war I actually certify that it be not a threat and would not affect the outcome of the war . and after circulate around the world come back in a form that be tremendously lethal . what percentage of infected people be kill by it ? again we do not really know for sure . it be clear that if you be malnourish to begin with , you have a weakened immune system , you live in poverty in india or africa , your likelihood of die be far great . but we do not really know .     audience member : one of the thing I 've hear be that the real death cause when you get a flu be the associated pneumonia , and that a pneumonia vaccine may offer you 50 percent well chance of survival .     lg : for a long time , researcher in emerge disease be kind of dismissive of the pandemic flu threat on the ground that back in 1918 they do not have antibiotic . and that most people who die of regular flu — which in regular flu year be about 360,000 people worldwide , most of they senior citizen — and they die not of the flu but because the flu give an assault to their immune system . and along come pneumococcus or another bacteria , streptococcus and boom , they get a bacterial pneumonia . but it turn out that in 1918 that be not the case at all . and so far in the h5n1 case in people , similarly bacterial infection have not be an issue at all . it be this absolutely phenomenal disruption of the immune system that be the key to why people die of this virus .     and I would just add we see the same thing with sars . so what be go on here be your body say , your immune system send out all its sentinel and say , " I do not know what the heck this be . we 've never see anything even remotely like this before . " it will not do any good to bring in the sharpshooter because those antibody be not here . and it will not do any good to bring in the tank and the artillery because those t - cell do not recognize it either . so we be go to have to go all - out thermonuclear response , stimulate the total cytokine cascade . the whole immune system swarm into the lung . and yes they die , drown in their own fluid , of pneumonia . but it be not bacterial pneumonia . and it be not a pneumonia that would respond to a vaccine . and I think my time be up . I thank you all for your attention . ( applause )
   what I want to do today be spend some time talk about some stuff that be give I a little bit of existential angst , for lack of a well word , over the past couple of year . and basically , these three quote tell what be go on . " when god make the color purple , god be just show off , " alice walker write in " the color purple . " and zora neale hurston write in " dust track on a road , " " research be a formalized curiosity . it be poke and prying with a purpose . " and then finally , when I think about the near future , we have this attitude , " well , whatever happen , happen . " right ? so that go along with the cheshire cat say , " if you do not care much where you want to get to , it do not much matter which way you go . "     but I think it do matter which way we go and what road we take , because when I think about design in the near future , what I think be the most important issue , what be really crucial and vital , be that we need to revitalize the art and science right now , in 2002 .     ( applause )     if we describe the near future as 10 , 20 , 15 year from now , that mean that what we do today be go to be critically important , because in the year 2015 , in the year 2020 , 2025 , the world our society be go to be build on , the basic knowledge and abstract idea , the discovery that we come up with today , just as all these wonderful thing we be hear about here at the ted conference that we take for grant in the world right now , be really knowledge and idea that come up in the 50 , the 60 and the 70 . that be the substrate that we be exploit today . whether it be the internet , genetic engineering , laser scanner , guide missile , fiber optic , high - definition television , remote sensing from space and the wonderful remote - sense photo that we see in 3d weaving , tv program like tracker and enterprise , cd - rewrite drive , flat - screen , alvin ailey 's " suite otis , " or sarah jones 's " your revolution will not [ happen ] between these thigh , " which , by the way , be ban by the fcc , or ska — all of these thing , without question , almost without exception , be really base on idea and abstract and creativity from year before . so we have to ask ourselves : what be we contribute to that legacy right now ?     and when I think about it , I be really worried . to be quite frank , I be concerned . I be skeptical that we be do very much of anything . we be , in a sense , fail to act in the future . we be purposefully , consciously be laggard . we be lag behind . frantz fanon , who be a psychiatrist from martinique , say , " each generation must , out of relative obscurity , discover its mission and fulfill or betray it . " what be our mission ? what do we have to do ?     I think our mission be to reconcile , to reintegrate science and the art , because right now , there be a schism that exist in popular culture . people have this idea that science and the art be really separate ; we think of they as separate and different thing . and this idea be probably introduce century ago , but it be really become critical now , because we be make decision about our society every day that , if we keep think that the art be separate from the science , and we keep think it be cute to say , " I do not understand anything about this one , I do not understand anything about the other one , " then we be go to have problem .     now , I know no one here at ted think this . all of we , we already know that they be very connected . but I be go to let you know that some folk in the outside world , believe it or not , think it be neat when they say , " scientist and science be not creative . maybe scientist be ingenious , but they be not creative . " and then we have this tendency , the career counselor and various people say thing like , " artist be not analytical . they be ingenious , perhaps , but not analytical . " and when these concept underlie our teaching and what we think about the world , then we have a problem , because we stymie support for everything . by accept this dichotomy , whether it be tongue - in - cheek , when we attempt to accommodate it in our world , and we try to build our foundation for the world , we be mess up the future , because : who want to be uncreative ? who want to be illogical ? talent would run from either of these field if you say you have to choose either . then they 'll go to something where they think , " well , I can be creative and logical at the same time . "     now , I grow up in the ' 60 and I 'll admit it — actually , my childhood span the ' 60 , and I be a wannabe hippie , and I always resent the fact that I be not old enough to be a hippie . and I know there be people here , the young generation , who want to be hippie . people talk about the ' 60 all the time . and they talk about the anarchy that be there . but when I think about the ' 60 , what I take away from it be that there be hope for the future . we think everyone could participate . there be wonderful , incredible idea that be always percolate , and so much of what be cool or hot today be really base on some of those concept , whether it be people try to use the prime directive from star trek , be involve in thing , or , again , that three - dimensional weaving and fax machine that I read about in my weekly reader that the technology and engineering be just getting start .     but the ' 60 leave I with a problem . you see , I always assume I would go into space , because I follow all of this . but I also love the art and science . you see , when I be grow up as a little girl and as a teenager , I love design and make doll clothe and want to be a fashion designer . I take art and ceramic . I love dance : lola falana , alvin ailey , jerome robbin . and I also avidly follow the gemini and the apollo program . I have science project and ton of astronomy book . I take calculus and philosophy . I wonder about infinity and the big bang theory . and when I be at stanford , I find myself , my senior year , chemical engineering major , half the folk think I be a political science and perform art major , which be sort of true , because I be black student union president , and I do major in some other thing . and I find myself the last quarter juggle chemical engineering separation process , logic class , nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy , and also produce and choreograph a dance production . and I have to do the lighting and the design work , and I be try to figure out : do I go to new york city to try to become a professional dancer , or to go to medical school ? now , my mother help I figure that one out .     ( laughter )     but when I go into space , I carry a number of thing up with I . I carry a poster by alvin ailey — you can figure out now , I love the dance company — an alvin ailey poster of judith jamison perform the dance " cry , " dedicate to all black woman everywhere ; a bundu statue , which be from the woman 's society in sierra leone ; and a certificate for the chicago public school student to work to improve their science and math . and folk ask I , " why do you take up what you take up ? " and I have to say , " because it represent human creativity ; the creativity that allow we , that we be require to have to conceive and build and launch the space shuttle , which spring from the same source as the imagination and analysis that it take to carve a bundu statue , or the ingenuity it take to design , choreograph and stage " cry . " each one of they be different manifestation , incarnation , of creativity — avatar of human creativity .     and that be what we have to reconcile in our mind , how these thing fit together . the difference between art and science be not analytical versus intuitive . right ? e = mc2 require an intuitive leap , and then you have to do the analysis afterwards . einstein say , in fact , " the most beautiful thing we can experience be the mysterious . it be the source of all true art and science . " dance require we to express and want to express the jubilation in life , but then you have to figure out : exactly what movement do I do to make sure it come across correctly ? the difference between art and science be also not constructive versus deconstructive . a lot of people think of the science as deconstructive , you have to pull thing apart . and yeah , subatomic physics be deconstructive — you literally try to tear atom apart to understand what be inside of they . but sculpture , from what I understand from great sculptor , be deconstructive , because you see a piece and you remove what do not need to be there . biotechnology be constructive . orchestral arranging be constructive .     so , in fact , we use constructive and deconstructive technique in everything . the difference between science and the art be not that they be different side of the same coin , even , or even different part of the same continuum , but rather , they be manifestation of the same thing . different quantum state of an atom ? or maybe if I want to be more 21st century , I could say that they be different harmonic resonance of a superstring . but we 'll leave that alone . they spring from the same source . the art and science be avatar of human creativity . it be our attempt as human to build an understanding of the universe , the world around we . it be our attempt to influence thing , the universe internal to ourselves and external to we .     the science , to I , be manifestation of our attempt to express or share our understanding , our experience , to influence the universe external to ourselves . it do not rely on we as individual . it be the universe , as experience by everyone . the art manifest our desire , our attempt to share or influence other through experience that be peculiar to we as individual . let I say it again another way : science provide an understanding of a universal experience , and art provide a universal understanding of a personal experience . that be what we have to think about , that they be all part of we , they be all part of a continuum . it be not just the tool , it be not just the science , the mathematic and the numerical stuff and the statistic , because we hear , very much on this stage , people talk about music be mathematical . art do not just use clay , be not the only one that use clay , light and sound and movement . they use analysis as well .     so people might say , " well , I still like that intuitive versus analytical thing , " because everybody want to do the right brain , leave brain thing . we 've all be accuse of be right - brain or left - brain at some point in time , depend on who we disagree with .     ( laughter )     you know , people say " intuitive " — that be like you be in touch with nature , in touch with yourself and relationship ; analytical , you put your mind to work . I be go to tell you a little secret . you all know this , though . but sometimes people use this analysis idea , that thing be outside of ourselves , to say , this be what we be go to elevate as the true , most important science , right ? then you have artist — and you all know this be true as well — artist will say thing about scientist because they say they be too concrete , they be disconnect from the world . but , we 've even have that here on stage , so do not act like you do not know what I be talk about .     ( laughter )     we have folk talk about the flat earth society and flower arranger , so there be this whole dichotomy that we continue to carry along , even when we know well . and folk say we need to choose either - or . but it would really be foolish to choose either one , intuitive versus analytical . that be a foolish choice . it be foolish just like try to choose between be realistic or idealistic . you need both in life . why do people do this ? I be go to quote a molecular biologist , sydney brenner , who be 70 year old , so he can say this . he say , " it be always important to distinguish between chastity and impotence . " now —     ( laughter )     I want to share with you a little equation , ok ? how do understand science and the art fit into our life and what be go on and the thing we be talk about here at the design conference ? and this be a little thing I come up with : understanding and our resource and our will cause we to have outcome . our understanding be our science , our art , our religion ; how we see the universe around we ; our resource , our money , our labor , our mineral — those thing that be out there in the world we have to work with . but more importantly , there be our will . this be our vision , our aspiration of the future , our hope , our dream , our struggle and our fear . our success and our failure influence what we do with all of those . and to I , design and engineering , craftsmanship and skilled labor , be all the thing that work on this to have our outcome , which be our human quality of life . where do we want the world to be ? and guess what ? regardless of how we look at this , whether we look at art and science as separate or different , they be both be influence now and they be both have problem .     I do a project call s.e.e.e the future : science , engineering and education . it be look at how to shed light on the most effective use of government funding . we get a bunch of scientist in all stage of their career . they come to dartmouth college , where I be teach . and they talk about , with theologian and financier : what be some of the issue of public funding for science and engineering research ? what be most important about it ? there be some idea that emerge that I think have really powerful parallel to the art .     the first thing they say be that the circumstance that we find ourselves in today in the science and engineering that make we world leader be very different than the ' 40 , the ' 50 , and the ' 60 and the ' 70s , when we emerge as world leader , because we be no long in competition with fascism , with soviet - style communism . and by the way , that competition be not just military ; it include social competition and political competition as well , that allow we to look at space as one of those platform to prove that our social system be well .     another thing they talk about be that the infrastructure that support the science be become obsolete . we look at university and college — small , mid - sized community college across the country — their laboratory be become obsolete . and this be where we train most of our science worker and our researcher — and our teacher , by the way . and there be a medium that do not support the dissemination of any more than the most mundane and inane of information . there be pseudoscience , crop circle , alien autopsy , haunted house , or disaster . and that be what we see . this be not really the information you need to operate in everyday life and figure out how to participate in this democracy and determine what be go on .     they also say there be a change in the corporate mentality . whereas government money have always be there for basic science and engineering research , we also count on some company to do some basic research . but what be happen now be company put more energy into short - term product development than they do in basic engineering and science research . and education be not keep up . in k through 12 , people be take out wet lab . they think if we put a computer in the room , it be go to take the place of actually mix the acid or grow the potato . and government funding be decrease in spending , and then they be say , let us have corporation take over , and that be not true . government funding should at least do thing like recognize cost benefit of basic science and engineering research . we have to know that we have a responsibility as global citizen in this world . we have to look at the education of human . we need to build our resource today to make sure that they be train so they understand the importance of these thing . and we have to support the vitality of science . that do not mean that everything have to have one thing that be go to go on , or that we know exactly what be go to be the outcome of it , but that we support the vitality and the intellectual curiosity that go along [ with it ] .     and if you think about those parallel to the art — the competition with the bolshoi ballet spur the joffrey and the new york city ballet to become well . infrastructure , museum , theater , movie house across the country be disappear . we have more television station with less to watch , we have more money spend on rewrite to get old television program in the movie . we have corporate funding now that , when it go to support the art , it almost require that the product be part of the picture that the artist draw . we have stadium that be name over and over again by corporation . in houston , we be try to figure out what to do with that enron stadium thing .     ( laughter )     fine art and education in the school be disappear , and we have a government that seem like it be gutte the nea and other program . so we have to really stop and think : what be we try to do with the science and the art ? there be a need to revitalize they . we have to pay attention to it . I just want to tell you quickly what I be do —     ( applause )     I want to tell you what I 've be do a little bit since ... I feel this need to sort of integrate some of the idea that I 've have and run across over time .     one of the thing that I find out be that there be a need to repair the dichotomy between the mind and body as well . my mother always tell I , you have to be observant , know what be go on in your mind and your body . and as a dancer , I have this tremendous faith in my ability to know my body , just as I know how to sense color . then I go to medical school , and I be suppose to just go on what the machine say about body . you know , you would ask patient question and some people would tell you , " do not listen to what the patient say . " we know that patient know and understand their body well , but these day we be try to divorce they from that idea . we have to reconcile the patient 's knowledge of their body with physician ' measurement .     we have someone talk about measure emotion and get machine to figure out what to keep we from act crazy . no , we should not measure . we should not use machine to measure road rage and then do something to keep we from engage in it . maybe we can have machine help we to recognize that we have road rage , and then we need to know how to control that without the machine . we even need to be able to recognize that without the machine . what I be very concerned about be : how do we bolster our self - awareness as human , as biological organism ? michael moschen speak of have to teach and learn how to feel with my eye , to see with my hand . we have all kind of possibility to use our sense by , and that be what we have to do . that be what I want to do — to try to use bioinstrumentation , those kind of thing , to help our sense in what we do .     that be the work I 've be do now , as a company call biosentient corporation . I figure I would have to do that ad , because I be an entrepreneur , and " entrepreneur " say " somebody who do what they want to do , because they be not break enough that they have to get a real job . "     ( laughter )     but that be the work I be do , biosentient corporation , try to figure out : how do we integrate these thing ? let I finish by say that my personal design issue for the future be really about integrate ; to think about that intuitive and that analytical . the art and science be not separate .     high school physics lesson before you leave : high school physics teacher use to hold up a ball . she would say , " this ball have potential energy . but nothing will happen to it , it can not do any work , until I drop it and it change state . " I like to think of idea as potential energy . they be really wonderful , but nothing will happen until we risk put they into action .     this conference be fill with wonderful idea . we be go to share lot of thing with people . but nothing be go to happen until we risk put those idea into action . we need to revitalize the art and science today . we need to take responsibility for the future . we can not hide behind say it be just for company profit , or it be just a business , or I be an artist or an academician .     here be how you judge what you be do : I talk about that balance between intuitive , analytical . fran lebowitz , my favorite cynic , say , " the three question of great concern ... " — now I be go to add on to design — " ... be : be it attractive ? " that be the intuitive . " be it amusing ? " — the analytical , and , " do it know its place ? " — the balance .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   I be not at all a cook . so do not fear , this be not go to be a cooking demonstration . but I do want to talk to you about something that I think be dear to all of we . and that be bread — something which be as simple as our basic , most fundamental human staple . and I think few of we spend the day without eat bread in some form . unless you be on one of these californian low - carb diet , bread be standard . bread be not only standard in the western diet . as I will show to you , it be actually the mainstay of modern life .     so I be go to bake bread for you . in the meantime I be also talk to you , so my life be go to be complicate . bear with I . first of all , a little bit of audience participation . I have two loaf of bread here . one be a supermarket standard : white bread , pre - package , which I be tell be call a wonderbread . ( laughter ) I do not know this word until I arrive . and this be more or less , a whole - meal , handmade , small - bakery loaf of bread . here we go . I want to see a show of hand . who prefer the whole - meal bread ? okay let I do this differently . be anybody prefer the wonderbread at all ? ( laughter ) I have two tentative male hand . ( laughter )     okay , now the question be really , why be this so ? and I think it be because we feel that this kind of bread really be about authenticity . it be about a traditional way of living . a way that be perhaps more real , more honest . this be an image from tuscany , where we feel agriculture be still about beauty . and life be really , too . and this be about good taste , good tradition . why do we have this image ? why do we feel that this be more true than this ? well I think it have a lot to do with our history . in the 10,000 year since agriculture evolve , most of our ancestor have actually be agriculturalist or they be closely relate to food production . and we have this mythical image of how life be in rural area in the past . art have help we to maintain that kind of image . it be a mythical past . of course , the reality be quite different . these poor farmer work the land by hand or with their animal , have yield level that be comparable to the poor farmer today in west africa . but we have , somehow , in the course of the last few century , or even decade , start to cultivate an image of a mythical , rural agricultural past .     it be only 200 year ago that we have the advent of the industrial revolution . and while I be start to make some bread for you here , it be very important to understand what that revolution do to we . it bring we power . it bring we mechanization , fertilizer . and it actually drive up our yield . and even sort of horrible thing , like pick bean by hand , can now be do automatically . all that be a real , great improvement , as we shall see . of course we also , particularly in the last decade , manage to envelop the world in a dense chain of supermarket , in a chain of global trade . and it mean that you now eat product , which can come from all around the world . that be the reality of our modern life . now you may prefer this loaf of bread . excuse my hand but this be how it be .     but actually the real relevant bread , historically , be this white wonder loaf . and do not despise the white bread because it really , I think , symbolize the fact that bread and food have become plentiful and affordable to all . and that be a feat that we be not really conscious of that much . but it have change the world . this tiny bread that be tasteless in some way and have a lot of problem have change the world . so what be happen ? well the good way to look at that be to do a tiny bit of simplistic statistic . with the advent of the industrial revolution with modernization of agriculture in the last few decade , since the 1960s , food availability , per head , in this world , have increase by 25 percent . and the world population in the meantime have double . that mean that we have now more food available than ever before in human history . and that be the result , directly , of be so successful at increase the scale and volume of our production . and this be true , as you can see , for all country , include the so - call develop country .     what happen to our bread in the meantime ? as food become plentiful here , it also mean that we be able to decrease the number of people work in agriculture to something like , on average , in the high income country , five percent or less of the population . in the u.s . only one percent of the people be actually farmer . and it free we all up to do other thing — to sit at ted meeting and not to worry about our food . that be , historically , a really unique situation . never before have the responsibility to feed the world be in the hand of so few people . and never before have so many people be oblivious of that fact .     so as food become more plentiful , bread become cheap . and as it become cheap , bread manufacturer decide to add in all kind of thing . we add in more sugar . we add in raisin and oil and milk and all kind of thing to make bread , from a simple food into kind of a support for calorie . and today , bread now be associate with obesity , which be very strange . it be the basic , most fundamental food that we 've have in the last ten thousand year . wheat be the most important crop — the first crop we domesticate and the most important crop we still grow today .     but this be now this strange concoction of high calorie . and that be not only true in this country , it be true all over the world . bread have migrate to tropical country , where the middle class now eat french roll and hamburger and where the commuter find bread much more handy to use than rice or cassava . so bread have become from a main staple , a source of calorie associate with obesity and also a source of modernity , of modern life . and the whiter the bread , in many country , the well it be .     so this be the story of bread as we know it now . but of course the price of mass production have be that we move large - scale . and large - scale have mean destruction of many of our landscape , destruction of biodiversity — still a lonely emu here in the brazilian cerrado soybean field . the cost have be tremendous — water pollution , all the thing you know about , destruction of our habitat .     what we need to do be to go back to understand what our food be about . and this be where I have to you all of you . how many of you can actually tell wheat apart from other cereal ? how many of you actually can make a bread in this way , without start with a bread machine or just some kind of package flavor ? can you actually bake bread ? do you know how much a loaf of bread actually cost ? we have become very removed from what our bread really be , which , again , evolutionarily speak , be very strange . in fact not many of you know that our bread , of course , be not a european invention . it be invent by farmer in iraq and syria in particular . the tiny spike on the left to the center be actually the forefather of wheat . this be where it all come from , and where these farmer who actually , ten thousand year ago , put we on the road of bread .     now it be not surprising that with this massification and large - scale production , there be a counter - movement that emerge — very much also here in california . the counter - movement say , " let us go back to this . let us go back to traditional farming . let us go back to small - scale , to farmer ' market , small bakery and all that . " wonderful . do not we all agree ? I certainly agree . I would love to go back to tuscany to this kind of traditional setting , gastronomy , good food . but this be a fallacy . and the fallacy come from idealize a past that we have forget about .     if we do this , if we want to stay with traditional small - scale farming we be go , actually , to relegate these poor farmer and their husband — among whom I have live for many year , work without electricity and water , to try to improve their food production — we relegate they to poverty . what they want be implement to increase their production : something to fertilize the soil , something to protect their crop and to bring it to a market . we can not just think that small - scale be the solution to the world food problem . it be a luxury solution for we who can afford it , if you want to afford it . in fact we do not want this poor woman to work the land like this . if we say just small - scale production , as be the tendency here , to go back to local food mean that a poor man like hans rosle can not even eat orange anymore because in scandinavia we do not have orange . so local food production be out . but also we do not want to relegate to poverty in the rural area . and we do not want to relegate the urban poor to starvation . so we must find other solution .     one of our problem be that world food production need to increase very rapidly — double by about 2030 . the main driver of that be actually meat . and meat consumption in southeast asia and china in particular be what drive the price of cereal . that need for animal protein be go to continue . we can discuss alternative in another talk , perhaps one day , but this be our drive force . so what can we do ? can we find a solution to produce more ? yes . but we need mechanization . and I be make a real plea here . I feel so strongly that you can not ask a small farmer to work the land and bend over to grow a hectare of rice , 150,000 time , just to plant a crop and weed it . you can not ask people to work under these condition . we need clever low - key mechanization that avoid the problem of the large - scale mechanization that we 've have .     so what can we do ? we must feed three billion people in city . we will not do that through small farmer ' market because these people have no small farmer ' market at their disposal . they have low income . and they benefit from cheap , affordable , safe and diverse food . that be what we must aim for in the next 20 to 30 year .     but yes there be some solution . and let I just do one simple conceptual thing : if I plot science as a proxy for control of the production process and scale . what you see be that we 've start in the left - hand corner with traditional agriculture , which be sort of small - scale and low - control . we 've move towards large - scale and very high control . what I want we to do be to keep up the science and even get more science in there but go to a kind of regional scale — not just in term of the scale of the field , but in term of the entire food network . that be where we should move . and the ultimate may be , but it do not apply to cereal , that we have entirely close ecosystem — the horticultural system right at the top left - hand corner . so we need to think differently about agriculture science . agriculture science for most people — and there be not many farmer among you here — have this name of be bad , of be about pollution , about large - scale , about the destruction of the environment . that be not necessary . we need more science and not less . and we need good science .     so what kind of science can we have ? well first of all I think we can do much well on the exist technology . use biotechnology where useful , particularly in pest and disease resistance . there be also robot , for example , who can recognize weed with a resolution of half an inch . we have much cleverer irrigation . we do not need to spill the water if we do not want to . and we need to think very dispassionately about the comparative advantage of small - scale and large - scale . we need to think that land be multi - functional . it have different function . there be different way in which we must use it — for residential , for nature , for agriculture purpose . and we also need to re - examine livestock . go regional and go to urban food system . I want to see fish pond in parking lot and basement . I want to have horticulture and greenhouse on top of residential area . and I want to use the energy that come from those greenhouse and from the fermentation of crop to heat our residential area . there be all kind of way we can do it . we can not solve the world food problem by use biological agriculture . but we can do a lot more .     and the main thing that I would really ask all of you as you go back to your country , or as you stay here : ask your government for an integrate food policy . food be as important as energy , as security , as the environment . everything be link together . so we can do that . in fact in a densely populate country like the river delta , where I live in the netherland , we have combine these function . so this be not science fiction . we can combine thing even in a social sense of make the rural area more accessible to people — to house , for example , the chronically sick . there be all kind of thing we can do .     but there be something you must do . it be not enough for I to say , " let us get more bold science into agriculture . " you must go back and think about your own food chain . talk to farmer . when be the last time you go to a farm and talk to a farmer ? talk to people in restaurant . understand where you be in the food chain , where your food come from . understand that you be part of this enormous chain of event . and that free you up to do other thing . and above all , to I , food be about respect . it be about understanding , when you eat , that there be also many people who be still in this situation , who be still struggle for their daily food . and the kind of simplistic solution that we sometimes have , to think that do everything by hand be go to be the solution , be really not morally justify . we need to help to lift they out of poverty . we need to make they proud of be a farmer because they allow we to survive . never before , as I say , have the responsibility for food be in the hand of so few . and never before have we have the luxury of take it for grant because it be now so cheap .     and I think there be nobody else who have express well , to I , the idea that food , in the end , in our own tradition , be something holy . it be not about nutrient and calorie . it be about share . it be about honesty . it be about identity . who say this so beautifully be mahatma gandhi , 75 year ago , when he speak about bread . he do not speak about rice , in india . he say , " to those who have to go without two meal a day , god can only appear as bread . "     and so as I be finish my bread here — and I 've be bake it , and I 'll try not to burn my hand . let I share with those of you here in the first row . let I share some of the food with you . take some of my bread . and as you eat it , and as you try it — please come and stand up . have some of it . I want you to think that every bite connect you to the past and the future : to these anonymous farmer , that first breed the first wheat variety ; and to the farmer of today , who 've be make this . and you do not even know who they be . every meal you eat contain ingredient from all across the world . everything make we so privileged , that we can eat this food , that we do not struggle every day . and that , I think , evolutionarily - speak be unique . we 've never have that before . so enjoy your bread . eat it , and feel privileged . thank you very much . ( applause )  
   alright . I be go to show you a couple of image from a very diverting paper in the journal of ultrasound in medicine . I be go to go way out on a limb and say that it be the most divert paper ever publish in the journal of ultrasound in medicine . the title be " observation of in - utero masturbation . "     ( laughter )     okay . now on the left you can see the hand — that be the big arrow — and the penis on the right . the hand hover . and over here we have , in the word of radiologist israel meisner , " the hand grasp the penis in a fashion resemble masturbation movement . " bear in mind this be an ultrasound , so it would have be move image .     orgasm be a reflex of the autonomic nervous system . now , this be the part of the nervous system that deal with the thing that we do not consciously control , like digestion , heart rate and sexual arousal . and the orgasm reflex can be trigger by a surprisingly broad range of input . genital stimulation . duh . but also , kinsey interview a woman who could be bring to orgasm by have someone stroke her eyebrow . people with spinal cord injury , like paraplegias , quadriplegia , will often develop a very , very sensitive area right above the level of their injury , wherever that be . there be such a thing as a knee orgasm in the literature .     I think the most curious one that I come across be a case report of a woman who have an orgasm every time she brush her tooth .     ( laughter )     something in the complex sensory - motor action of brush her tooth be trigger orgasm . and she go to a neurologist , who be fascinated . he check to see if it be something in the toothpaste , but no — it happen with any brand . they stimulate her gum with a toothpick , to see if that be do it . no . it be the whole , you know , motion . and the amazing thing to I be that you would think this woman would have excellent oral hygiene .     ( laughter )     sadly — this be what it say in the journal paper — " she believe that she be possess by demon and switch to mouthwash for her oral care . " it be so sad .     ( laughter )     when I be work on the book , I interview a woman who can think herself to orgasm . she be part of a study at rutgers university . you 've get to love that . rutger . so I interview she in oakland , in a sushi restaurant . and I say , " so , could you do it right here ? " and she say , " yeah , but you know I would rather finish my meal if you do not mind . "     ( laughter )     but afterwards , she be kind enough to demonstrate on a bench outside . it be remarkable . it take about one minute . and I say to she , " be you just do this all the time ? "     ( laughter )     she say , " no . honestly , when I get home , I be usually too tired . "     ( laughter )     she say that the last time she have do it be on the disneyland tram .     ( laughter )     the headquarters for orgasm , along the spinal nerve , be something call the sacral nerve root , which be back here . and if you trigger , if you stimulate with an electrode , the precise spot , you will trigger an orgasm . and it be a fact that you can trigger spinal reflex in dead people — a certain kind of dead person , a beat - heart cadaver . now this be somebody who be brain - dead , legally dead , definitely check out , but be be keep alive on a respirator , so that their organ will be oxygenate for transplantation . now in one of these brain - dead people , if you trigger the right spot , you will see something every now and then . there be a reflex call the lazarus reflex . and this be — I 'll demonstrate as well I can , not be dead . it be like this . you trigger the spot . the dead guy , or gal , go ... like that . very unsettling for people work in pathology lab .     ( laughter )     now , if you can trigger the lazarus reflex in a dead person , why not the orgasm reflex ? I ask this question to a brain death expert , stephanie mann , who be foolish enough to return my email .     ( laughter )     I say , " so , could you conceivably trigger an orgasm in a dead person ? " she say , " yes , if the sacral nerve be be oxygenate , you conceivably could . " obviously it would not be as much fun for the person . but it would be an orgasm —     ( laughter )     nonetheless .     there be a researcher at the university of alabama who do orgasm research . I say to she , " you should do an experiment . you know ? you can get cadaver if you work at a university . " I say , " you should actually do this . " she say , " you get the human subject review board approval for this one . "     ( laughter )     accord to 1930s marriage manual author , theodoor van de velde , a slight seminal odor can be detect on the breath of a woman within about an hour after sexual intercourse . theodoor van de velde be something of a semen connoisseur .     ( laughter )     this be a guy write a book , " ideal marriage , " you know . very heavy hetero guy . but he write in this book , " ideal marriage " — he say that he could differentiate between the semen of a young man , which he say have a fresh , exhilarate smell , and the semen of mature man , whose seman smell , quote , " remarkably like that of the flower of the spanish chestnut . sometimes quite freshly floral , and then again sometimes extremely pungent . "     ( laughter )     okay . in 1999 , in the state of israel , a man begin hiccup . and this be one of those case that go on and on . he try everything his friend suggest . nothing seem to help . day go by . at a certain point , the man , still hiccup , have sex with his wife . and lo and behold , the hiccup go away . he tell his doctor , who publish a case report in a canadian medical journal under the title , " sexual intercourse as a potential treatment for intractable hiccup . " I love this article because at a certain point they suggest that unattache hiccupper could try masturbation .     ( laughter )     I love that because there be like a whole demographic : unattache hiccupper .     ( laughter )     married , single , unattached hiccupper . in the 1900 , early 1900s , a lot of gynecologist believe that when a woman have an orgasm , the contraction serve to suck the semen up through the cervix and sort of deliver it really quickly to the egg , thereby up the odd of conception . it be call the " upsuck " theory .     ( laughter )     if you go all the way back to hippocrate , physician believe that orgasm in woman be not just helpful for conception , but necessary . doctor back then be routinely tell man the importance of pleasure their wife . marriage - manual author and semen - sniffer theodoor van de velde —     ( laughter )     have a line in his book . I love this guy . I get a lot of mileage out of theodoor van de velde . he have this line in his book that supposedly come from the habsburg monarchy , where there be an empress maria theresa , who be have trouble conceiving . and apparently the royal court physician say to she , " I be of the opinion that the vulva of your most sacred majesty be titillate for some time prior to intercourse . "     ( laughter )     it be apparently , I do not know , on the record somewhere .     master and johnson : now we be move forward to the 1950 . master and johnson be upsuck skeptic , which be also really fun to say . they do not buy it . and they decide , be master and johnson , that they would get to the bottom of it . they bring woman into the lab — I think it be five woman — and outfit they with cervical cap contain artificial seman . and in the artificial semen be a radio - opaque substance , such that it would show up on an x - ray . this be the 1950s . anyway , these woman sit in front of an x - ray device . and they masturbate . and masters and johnson look to see if the semen be be suck up . do not find any evidence of upsuck . you may be wonder , " how do you make artificial seman ? "     ( laughter )     I have an answer for you . I have two answer . you can use flour and water , or cornstarch and water . I actually find three separate recipe in the literature .     ( laughter )     my favorite be the one that say — you know , they have the ingredient list , and then in a recipe it will say , for example , " yield : two dozen cupcake . " this one say , " yield : one ejaculate . "     ( laughter )     there be another way that orgasm might boost fertility . this one involve man . sperm that sit around in the body for a week or more start to develop abnormality that make they less effective at head - bang their way into the egg . british sexologist roy levin have speculate that this be perhaps why man evolve to be such enthusiastic and frequent masturbator . he say , " if I keep toss myself off I get fresh sperm be make . " which I think be an interesting idea , theory . so now you have an evolutionary excuse .     ( laughter )     okay .     ( laughter )     all righty . there be considerable evidence for upsuck in the animal kingdom — pig , for instance . in denmark , the danish national committee for pig production find out that if you sexually stimulate a sow while you artificially inseminate she , you will see a six - percent increase in the farrow rate , which be the number of piglet produce . so they come up with this five - point stimulation plan for the sow . there be poster they put in the barn , and they have a dvd . and I get a copy of this dvd .     ( laughter )     this be my unveiling , because I be go to show you a clip .     ( laughter )     so , okay . now , here we go , la la la , off to work . it all look very innocent . he be go to be do thing with his hand that the boar would use his snout , lack hand . okay .     ( laughter )     this be it . the boar have a very odd courtship repertoire .     ( laughter )     this be to mimic the weight of the boar .     ( laughter )     you should know , the clitoris of the pig be inside the vagina . so this may be sort of titillate for she . here we go .     ( laughter )     and the happy result .     ( applause )     I love this video . there be a point in this video , towards the beginning , where they zoom in for a close up of his hand with his wedding ring , as if to say , " it be okay , it be just his job . he really do like woman . "     ( laughter )     okay . when I be in denmark , my host be name anne marie . and I say , " so why do not you just stimulate the clitoris of the pig ? why do not you have the farmer do that ? that be not one of your five step . " I have to read you what she say , because I love it . she say , " it be a big hurdle just to get farmer to touch underneath the vulva . so we think , let us not mention the clitoris right now . "     ( laughter )     shy but ambitious pig farmer , however , can purchase a — this be true — a sow vibrator , that hang on the sperm feeder tube to vibrate . because , as I mention , the clitoris be inside the vagina . so possibly , you know , a little more arousing than it look . and I also say to she , " now , these sow . I mean , you may have notice there . the sow do not look to be in the throe of ecstasy . " and she say , you can not make that conclusion , because animal do not register pain or pleasure on their face in the same way that we do . pig , for example , be more like dog . they use the upper half of the face ; the ear be very expressive . so you be not really sure what be go on with the pig .     primate , on the other hand , we use our mouth more . this be the ejaculation face of the stump - tail macaque .     ( laughter )     and , interestingly , this have be observe in female macaque , but only when mount another female .     ( laughter )     master and johnson . in the 1950 , they decide , okay , we be go to figure out the entire human sexual response cycle , from arousal , all the way through orgasm , in man and woman — everything that happen in the human body . okay , with woman , a lot of this be happen inside . this do not stop master and johnson . they develop an artificial coition machine . this be basically a penis camera on a motor . there be a phallus , clear acrylic phallus , with a camera and a light source , attach to a motor that be kind of go like this . and the woman would have sex with it . that be what they would do . pretty amazing . sadly , this device have be dismantle . this just kill I , not because I want to use it — I want to see it .     ( laughter )     one fine day , alfred kinsey decide to calculate the average distance travel by ejaculate seman . this be not idle curiosity . doctor kinsey have hear — and there be a theory go around at the time , this be the 1940 — that the force with which semen be throw against the cervix be a factor in fertility . kinsey think it be bunk , so he get to work . he get together in his lab 300 man , a measuring tape , and a movie camera .     ( laughter )     and in fact , he find that in three quarter of the man the stuff just kind of slop out . it be not spurt or throw or eject under great force . however , the record holder land just shy of the eight - foot mark , which be impressive .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     yes . exactly .     ( laughter )     sadly , he be anonymous . his name be not mention .     ( laughter )     in his write - up of this experiment in his book , kinsey write , " two sheet be lay down to protect the oriental carpet . "     ( laughter )     which be my second favorite line in the entire oeuvre of alfred kinsey . my favorite being , " cheese crumb spread before a pair of copulate rat will distract the female , but not the male . "     ( laughter )     thank you very much .     ( applause )     thank !  
   two year ago here at ted I report that we have discover at saturn , with the cassini spacecraft , an anomalously warm and geologically active region at the southern tip of the small saturnine moon enceladus , see here . this region see here for the first time in the cassini image take in 2005 . this be the south polar region , with the famous tiger - stripe fracture cross the south pole . and see just recently in late 2008 , here be that region again , now half in darkness because the southern hemisphere be experience the onset of august and eventually winter .     and I also report that we would make this mind - blow discovery — this once - in - a - lifetime discovery of tower jet erupt from those fracture at the south pole , consist of tiny water ice crystal accompany by water vapor and simple organic compound like carbon dioxide and methane . and at that time two year ago I mention that we be speculate that these jet might in fact be geyser , and erupt from pocket or chamber of liquid water underneath the surface , but we be not really sure . however , the implication of those result — of a possible environment within this moon that could support prebiotic chemistry , and perhaps life itself — be so exciting that , in the intervene two year , we have focus more on enceladus .     we 've fly the cassini spacecraft by this moon now several time , fly close and deeply into these jet , into the denser region of these jet , so that now we have come away with some very precise compositional measurement . and we have find that the organic compound come from this moon be in fact more complex than we previously report . while they be not amino acid , we be now find thing like propane and benzene , hydrogen cyanide , and formaldehyde . and the tiny water crystal here now look for all the world like they be frozen droplet of salty water , which be a discovery that suggest that not only do the jet come from pocket of liquid water , but that that liquid water be in contact with rock . and that be a circumstance that could supply the chemical energy and the chemical compound need to sustain life .     so we be very encouraged by these result . and we be much more confident now than we be two year ago that we might indeed have on this moon , under the south pole , an environment or a zone that be hospitable to live organism . whether or not there be live organism there , of course , be an entirely different matter . and that will have to await the arrival , back at enceladus , of the spacecraft , hopefully some time in the near future , specifically equip to address that particular question . but in the meantime I invite you to imagine the day when we might journey to the saturnine system , and visit the enceladus interplanetary geyser park , just because we can .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be think about my place in the universe , and about my first thought about what infinity might mean , when I be a child . and I think that if time could reach forward and backwards infinitely , do not that mean that every point in time be really infinitely small , and therefore somewhat meaningless . so we do not really have a place in the universe , as far as on a time line . but nothing else do either . therefore every moment really be the most important moment that be ever happen , include this moment right now . and so therefore this music you be about to hear be maybe the most important music you 'll ever hear in your life .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     ( applause ) thank you . ( applause )     ( applause )     for those of you who I 'll be fortunate enough to meet afterwards , you could please refrain from say , " oh my god , you be so much short in real life . " ( laughter ) because it be like the stage be an optical illusion , for some reason . ( laughter ) somewhat like the curving of the universe .     I do not know what it be . I get ask in interview a lot , " my god , you be guitar be so gigantic ! " ( laughter ) " you must get they custom make — special , humongous guitar . "     ( laughter )     ( applause ) thank you very much . ( applause )  
   college president be not the first people who come to mind when the subject be the use of the creative imagination . so I think I would start by tell you how I get here .     the story begin in the late ' 90 . I be invite to meet with lead educator from the newly free eastern europe and russia . they be try to figure out how to rebuild their university . since education under the soviet union be essentially propaganda serve the purpose of a state ideology , they appreciate that it would take wholesale transformation if they be to provide an education worthy of free man and woman . give this rare opportunity to start fresh , they choose liberal art as the most compelling model because of its historic commitment to further its student ' broad intellectual , and deep ethical potential .     having make that decision they come to the united states , home of liberal art education , to talk with some of we most closely identify with that kind of education . they speak with a passion , an urgency , an intellectual conviction that , for I , be a voice I have not hear in decade , a dream long forget . for , in truth , we have move light year from the passion that animate they . but for I , unlike they , in my world , the slate be not clean , and what be write on it be not encouraging .     in truth , liberal art education no long exist — at least genuine liberal art education — in this country . we have professionalize liberal art to the point where they no long provide the breadth of application and the enhance capacity for civic engagement that be their signature . over the past century the expert have dethrone the educate generalist to become the sole model of intellectual accomplishment . ( applause )     expertise have for sure have its moment . but the price of its dominance be enormous . subject matter be break up into small and small piece , with increase emphasis on the technical and the obscure . we have even manage to make the study of literature arcane . you may think you know what be go on in that jane austen novel — that is , until your first encounter with postmodern deconstructionism .     the progression of today 's college student be to jettison every interest except one . and within that one , to continually narrow the focus , learn more and more about less and less ; this , despite the evidence all around we of the interconnectedness of thing . lest you think I exaggerate , here be the beginning of the a - b - cs of anthropology . as one move up the ladder , value other than technical competence be view with increase suspicion . question such as , " what kind of a world be we make ? what kind of a world should we be make ? what kind of a world can we be make ? " be treat with more and more skepticism , and move off the table .     in so do , the guardian of secular democracy in effect yield the connection between education and value to fundamentalist , who , you can be sure , have no compunction about use education to further their value : the absolute of a theocracy . meanwhile , the value and voice of democracy be silent . either we have lose touch with those value or , no well , believe they need not or can not be teach . this aversion to social value may seem at odd with the explosion of community service program . but despite the attention pay to these effort , they remain emphatically extracurricular . in effect , civic - mindedness be treat as outside the realm of what purport to be serious thinking and adult purpose . simply put , when the impulse be to change the world , the academy be more likely to engender a learned helplessness than to create a sense of empowerment .     this brew — oversimplification of civic engagement , idealization of the expert , fragmentation of knowledge , emphasis on technical mastery , neutrality as a condition of academic integrity — be toxic when it come to pursue the vital connection between education and the public good , between intellectual integrity and human freedom , which be at the heart — ( applause ) — of the challenge pose to and by my european colleague . when the astronomical distance between the reality of the academy and the visionary intensity of this challenge be more than enough , I can assure you , to give one pause , what be happen outside high education make back off unthinkable .     whether it be threat to the environment , inequity in the distribution of wealth , lack of a sane policy or a sustainable policy with respect to the continue use of energy , we be in desperate strait . and that be only the beginning . the corrupting of our political life have become a living nightmare ; nothing be exempt — separation of power , civil liberty , the rule of law , the relationship of church and state . accompany by a squandering of the nation 's material wealth that defy credulity . a harrowing predilection for the use of force have become commonplace , with an equal distaste for the alternative form of influence . at the same time , all of our firepower be impotent when it come to halting or even stem the slaughter in rwanda , darfur , myanmar .     our public education , once a model for the world , have become most noteworthy for its failure . mastery of basic skill and a bare minimum of cultural literacy elude vast number of our student . despite have a research establishment that be the envy of the world , more than half of the american public do not believe in evolution . and do not press your luck about how much those who do believe in it actually understand it .     incredibly , this nation , with all its material , intellectual and spiritual resource , seem utterly helpless to reverse the freefall in any of these area . equally startling , from my point of view , be the fact that no one be draw any connection between what be happen to the body politic , and what be happen in our lead educational institution . we may be at the top of the list when it come to influence access to personal wealth . we be not even on the list when it come to our responsibility for the health of this democracy . we be play with fire . you can be sure jefferson know what he be talk about when he say , " if a nation expect to be ignorant and free in a state of civilization , it expect what never be , and never will be . " ( applause )     on a more personal note , this betrayal of our principle , our decency , our hope , make it impossible for I to avoid the question , " what will I say , year from now , when people ask , ' where be you ? ' " as president of a lead liberal art college , famous for its innovative history , there be no excuse . so the conversation begin at bennington . know that if we be to regain the integrity of liberal education , it would take radical rethinking of basic assumption , begin with our priority . enhance the public good become a primary objective . the accomplishment of civic virtue be tie to the use of intellect and imagination at their most challenging .     our way of approach agency and authority turn inside out to reflect the reality that no one have the answer to the challenge face citizen in this century , and everyone have the responsibility for try and participate in find they . bennington would continue to teach the art and science as area of immersion that acknowledge difference in personal and professional objective . but the balance redress , our share purpose assume an equal if not great importance .     when the design emerge it be surprisingly simple and straightforward . the idea be to make the political - social challenge themselves — from health and education to the use of force — the organizer of the curriculum . they would assume the commanding role of traditional discipline . but structure design to connect , rather than divide mutually dependent circle , rather than isolate triangle . and the point be not to treat these topic as topic of study , but as framework of action . the challenge : to figure out what it will take to actually do something that make a significant and sustainable difference .     contrary to widely hold assumption , an emphasis on action provide a special urgency to think . the importance of come to grip with value like justice , equity , truth , become increasingly evident as student discover that interest alone can not tell they what they need to know when the issue be rethink education , our approach to health , or strategy for achieve an economic of equity . the value of the past also come alive ; it provide a lot of company . you be not the first to try to figure this out , just as you be unlikely to be the last . even more valuable , history provide a laboratory in which we see play out the actual , as well as the intend consequence of idea .     in the language of my student , " deep thought matter when you be contemplate what to do about thing that matter . " a new liberal art that can support this action - orient curriculum have begin to emerge . rhetoric , the art of organize the world of word to maximum effect . design , the art of organize the world of thing . mediation and improvisation also assume a special place in this new pantheon . quantitative reasoning attain its proper position at the heart of what it take to manage change where measurement be crucial . as be a capacity to discriminate systematically between what be at the core and what be at the periphery .     and when make connection be of the essence , the power of technology emerge with special intensity . but so do the importance of content . the more powerful our reach , the more important the question " about what ? " when improvisation , resourcefulness , imagination be key , artist , at long last , take their place at the table , when strategy of action be in the process of be design . in this dramatically expand ideal of a liberal art education where the continuum of thought and action be its life 's blood , knowledge hone outside the academy become essential . social activist , business leader , lawyer , politician , professional will join the faculty as active and ongoing participant in this wedding of liberal education to the advancement of the public good . student , in turn , continuously move outside the classroom to engage the world directly .     and of course , this new wine need new bottle if we be to capture the liveliness and dynamism of this idea . the most important discovery we make in our focus on public action be to appreciate that the hard choice be not between good and evil , but between compete good . this discovery be transform . it undercut self - righteousness , radically alter the tone and character of controversy , and enrich dramatically the possibility for find common ground . ideology , zealotry , unsubstantiated opinion simply will not do . this be a political education , to be sure . but it be a politic of principle , not of partisanship . so the challenge for bennington be to do it .     on the cover of bennington 's 2008 holiday card be the architect 's sketch of a building opening in 2010 that be to be a center for the advancement of public action . the center will embody and sustain this new educational commitment . think of it as a kind of secular church . the word on the card describe what will happen inside . we intend to turn the intellectual and imaginative power , passion and boldness of our student , faculty and staff to develop strategy for act on the critical challenge of our time .     so we be do our job . while these past week have be a time of national exhilaration in this country , it would be tragic if you think this mean your job be do . the glacial silence we have experience in the face of the shredding of the constitution , the unraveling of our public institution , the deterioration of our infrastructure be not limit to the university . we the people have become inure to our own irrelevance when it come to do anything significant about anything that matter concern governance , beyond wait another four year . we persist also in be sideline by the idea of the expert as the only one capable of come up with answer , despite the overwhelming evidence to the contrary .     the problem be there be no such thing as a viable democracy make up of expert , zealot , politician and spectator . ( applause ) people will continue and should continue to learn everything there be to know about something or other . we actually do it all the time . and there will be and should be those who spend a lifetime pursue a very highly define area of inquiry . but this single - mindedness will not yield the flexibility of mind , the multiplicity of perspective , the capacity for collaboration and innovation this country need . that be where you come in . what be certain be that the individual talent exhibit in such abundance here , need to turn its attention to that collaborative , messy , frustrating , contentious and impossible world of politic and public policy . president obama and his team simply can not do it alone .     if the question of where to start seem overwhelming you be at the beginning , not the end of this adventure . be overwhelmed be the first step if you be serious about try to get at thing that really matter , on a scale that make a difference . so what do you do when you feel overwhelmed ? well , you have two thing . you have a mind . and you have other people . start with those , and change the world .     ( applause )  
   this be call hooked on a feeling : the pursuit of happiness and human design . I put up a somewhat dour darwin , but a very happy chimp up there . my first point be that the pursuit of happiness be obligatory . man wish to be happy , only wish to be happy , and can not wish not to be so . we be wire to pursue happiness , not only to enjoy it , but to want more and more of it .     so give that that be true , how good be we at increase our happiness ? well , we certainly try . if you look on the amazon site , there be over 2,000 title with advice on the seven habit , the nine choice , the 10 secret , the 14,000 thought that be suppose to bring happiness . now another way we try to increase our happiness be we medicate ourselves . and so there be over 120 million prescription out there for antidepressant . prozac be really the first absolute blockbuster drug . it be clean , efficient , there be no high , there be really no danger , it have no street value . in 1995 , illegal drug be a $ 400 billion business , represent eight percent of world trade , roughly the same as gas and oil .     these route to happiness have not really increase happiness very much . one problem that be happen now be , although the rate of happiness be about as flat as the surface of the moon , depression and anxiety be rise . some people say this be because we have well diagnosis , and more people be be find out . it be not just that . we be see it all over the world . in the united states right now there be more suicide than homicide . there be a rash of suicide in china . and the world health organization predict by the year 2020 that depression will be the second large cause of disability .     now the good news here be that if you take survey from around the world , we see that about three quarter of people will say they be at least pretty happy . but this do not follow any of the usual trend . for example , these two show great growth in income , absolutely flat happiness curve .     my field , the field of psychology , have not do a whole lot to help we move forward in understand human happiness . in part , we have the legacy of freud , who be a pessimist , who say that pursuit of happiness be a doomed quest , be propel by infantile aspect of the individual that can never be meet in reality . he say , " one feel inclined to say that the intention that man should be happy be not include in the plan of creation . " so the ultimate goal of psychoanalytic psychotherapy be really what freud call ordinary misery .     ( laughter )     and freud in part reflect the anatomy of the human emotion system — which be that we have both a positive and a negative system , and our negative system be extremely sensitive . so for example , we be bear love the taste of something sweet and react aversively to the taste of something bitter . we also find that people be more averse to lose than they be happy to gain . the formula for a happy marriage be five positive remark , or interaction , for every one negative . and that be how powerful the one negative be . especially expression of contempt or disgust , well you really need a lot of positive to upset that .     I also put in here the stress response . we be wire for danger that be immediate , that be physical , that be imminent , and so our body go into an incredible reaction where endogenous opioid come in . we have a system that be really ancient , and really there for physical danger . and so over time , this become a stress response , which have enormous effect on the body . cortisol flood the brain ; it destroy hippocampal cell and memory , and can lead to all kind of health problem .     but unfortunately , we need this system in part . if we be only govern by pleasure we would not survive . we really have two command post . emotion be short - live intense response to challenge and to opportunity . and each one of they allow we to click into alternate self that tune in , turn on , drop out thought , perception , feeling and memory . we tend to think of emotion as just feeling . but in fact , emotion be an all - system alert that change what we remember , what kind of decision we make , and how we perceive thing .     so let I go forward to the new science of happiness . we 've come away from the freudian gloom , and people be now actively study this . and one of the key point in the science of happiness be that happiness and unhappiness be not endpoint of a single continuum . the freudian model be really one continuum that , as you get less miserable , you get happy . and that be not true — when you get less miserable , you get less miserable . and that happiness be a whole other end of the equation . and it be be miss . it be be miss from psychotherapy . so when people 's symptom go away , they tend to recur , because there be not a sense of the other half — of what pleasure , happiness , compassion , gratitude , what be the positive emotion . and of course we know this intuitively , that happiness be not just the absence of misery . but somehow it be not put forward until very recently , see these as two parallel system . so that the body can both look for opportunity and also protect itself from danger , at the same time . and they be sort of two reciprocal and dynamically interact system .     people have also want to deconstruct . we use this word " happy , " and it be this very large umbrella of a term . and then three emotion for which there be no english word : fiero , which be the pride in accomplishment of a challenge ; schadenfreude , which be happiness in another 's misfortune , a malicious pleasure ; and nache , which be a pride and joy in one 's child . absent from this list , and absent from any discussion of happiness , be happiness in another 's happiness . we do not seem to have a word for that . we be very sensitive to the negative , but it be in part offset by the fact that we have a positivity .     we be also bear pleasure - seeker . baby love the taste of sweet and hate the taste of bitter . they love to touch smooth surface rather than rough one . they like to look at beautiful face rather than plain face . they like to listen to consonant melody instead of dissonant melody . baby really be bear with a lot of innate pleasure . there be once a statement make by a psychologist that say that 80 percent of the pursuit of happiness be really just about the gene , and it be as difficult to become happy as it be to become tall . that be nonsense . there be a decent contribution to happiness from the gene — about 50 percent — but there be still that 50 percent that be unaccounted for .     let us just go into the brain for a moment , and see where do happiness arise from in evolution . we have basically at least two system here , and they both be very ancient . one be the reward system , and that be feed by the chemical dopamine . and it start in the ventral tegmental area . it go to the nucleus accumben , all the way up to the prefrontal cortex , orbital frontal cortex , where decision be make , high level . this be originally see as a system that be the pleasure system of the brain . in the 1950s , old and milner put electrode into the brain of a rat . and the rat would just keep press that bar thousand and thousand and thousand of time . it would not eat . it would not sleep . it would not have sex . it would not do anything but press this bar . so they assume this must be , you know , the brain 's orgasmatron .     it turn out that it be not , that it really be a system of motivation , a system of wanting . it give object what be call incentive salience . it make something look so attractive that you just have to go after it . that be something different from the system that be the pleasure system , which simply say , " I like this . " the pleasure system , as you see , which be the internal opiate , there be a hormone oxytocin , be widely spread throughout the brain . dopamine system , the wanting system , be much more centralized .     the other thing about positive emotion be that they have a universal signal . and we see here the smile . and the universal signal be not just raise the corner of the lip to the zygomatic major . it be also crinkle the outer corner of the eye , the orbicularis oculus . so you see , even 10 - month - old baby , when they see their mother , will show this particular kind of smile . extrovert use it more than introvert . people who be relieve of depression show it more after than before . so if you want to unmask a true look of happiness , you will look for this expression .     our pleasure be really ancient . and we learn , of course , many , many pleasure , but many of they be base . and one of they , of course , be biophilia — that we have a response to the natural world that be very profound . very interesting study do on people recover from surgery , who find that people who face a brick wall versus people who look out on tree and nature , the people who look out on the brick wall be in the hospital long , need more medication , and have more medical complication . there be something very restorative about nature , and it be part of how we be tune .     human , particularly so , we be very imitative creature . and we imitate from almost the second we be bear . here be a three - week - old baby . and if you stick your tongue out at this baby , the baby will do the same . we be social being from the beginning . and even study of cooperation show that cooperation between individual light up reward center of the brain . one problem that psychology have have be instead of look at this intersubjectivity — or the importance of the social brain to human who come into the world helpless and need each other tremendously — be that they focus instead on the self and self - esteem , and not self - other . it be sort of " I , " not " we . " and I think this have be a really tremendous problem that go against our biology and nature , and have not make we any happy at all .     because when you think about it , people be happy when in flow , when they be absorb in something out in the world , when they be with other people , when they be active , engage in sport , focus on a love one , learn , have sex , whatever . they be not sit in front of the mirror try to figure themselves out , or think about themselves . these be not the period when you feel happy . the other thing be , that a piece of evidence be , be if you look at computerized text analysis of people who commit suicide , what you find there , and it be quite interesting , be use of the first person singular — " I , " " I , " " my , " not " we " and " we " — and the letter be less hopeless than they be really alone . and be alone be very unnatural to the human . there be a profound need to belong .     but there be way in which our evolutionary history can really trip we up . because , for example , the gene do not care whether we be happy , they care that we replicate , that we pass our gene on . so for example we have three system that underlie reproduction , because it be so important . there be lust , which be just want to have sex . and that be really mediate by the sex hormone . romantic attraction , that get into the desire system . and that be dopamine - fed . and that be , " I must have this one person . " there be attachment , which be oxytocin , and the opiate , which say , " this be a long - term bond . " see the problem be that , as human , these three can separate . so a person can be in a long term attachment , become romantically infatuate with someone else , and want to have sex with a third person .     the other way in which our gene can sometimes lead we astray be in social status . we be very acutely aware of our social status and always seek to far and increase it . now in the animal world , there be only one way to increase status , and that be dominance . I seize command by physical prowess , and I keep it by beat my chest , and you make submissive gesture . now , the human have a whole other way to rise to the top , and that be a prestige route , which be freely confer . someone have expertise and knowledge , and know how to do thing , and we give that person status . and that be clearly the way for we to create many more niche of status so that people do not have to be low on the status hierarchy as they be in the animal world .     the datum be not terribly supportive of money buy happiness . but it be not irrelevant . so if you look at question like this , life satisfaction , you see life satisfaction go up with each rung of income . you see mental distress go up with low income . so clearly there be some effect . but the effect be relatively small . and one of the problem with money be materialism . what happen when people pursue money too avidly , be they forget about the real basic pleasure of life . so we have here , this couple . " do you think the less - fortunate be have well sex ? " and then this kid over here be say , " leave I alone with my toy . " so one of the thing be that it really take over . that whole dopamine - want system take over and derail from any of the pleasure system .     maslow have this idea back in the 1950 that as people rise above their biological need , as the world become safe and we do not have to worry about basic need be meet — our biological system , whatever motivate we , be be satisfied — we can rise above they , to think beyond ourselves toward self - actualization or transcendence , and rise above the materialist .     so to just quickly conclude with some brief datum that suggest this might be so . one be people who undergo what be call a quantum change : they feel their life and their whole value have change . and sure enough , if you look at the kind of value that come in , you see wealth , adventure , achievement , pleasure , fun , be respect , before the change , and much more post - materialist value after . woman have a whole different set of value shift . but very similarly , the only one that survive there be happiness . they go from attractiveness and happiness and wealth and self - control to generosity and forgiveness .     I end with a few quote . " there be only one question : how to love this world ? " and rilke , " if your daily life seem poor , do not blame it ; blame yourself . tell yourself that you be not poet enough to call forth its rich . " " first , say to yourself what you would be . then do what you have to do . "     thank you . ( applause )  
   my journey to come here today start in 1974 . that be I with the funny glove . I be 17 and go on a peace walk . what I do not know though , be most of those people , stand there with I , be moonie . ( laughter ) and within a week I have come to believe that the second coming of christ have occur , that it be sun myung moon , and that I have be specially choose and prepare by god to be his disciple .     now as cool as that sound , my family be not that thrilled with this . ( laughter ) and they try everything they could to get I out of there . there be an underground railroad of sort that be go on during those year . maybe some of you remember it . they be call deprogrammer . and after about five long year my family have I deprogramme . and I then become a deprogrammer . I start go out on case . and after about five year of do this , I be arrest for kidnapping . most of the case I go out on be call involuntary . what happen be that the family have to get their love one some safe place somehow . and so they take they to some safe place . and we would come in and talk to they , usually for about a week . and so after this happen , I decide it be a good time to turn my back on this work .     and about 20 year go by . there be a burn question though that would not leave I . and that be , " how do this happen to I ? " and in fact , what do happen to my brain ? because something do . and so I decide to write a book , a memoir , about this decade of my life .     and toward the end of write that book there be a documentary that come out . it be on jonestown . and it have a chilling effect on I . these be the dead in jonestown . about 900 people die that day , most of they take their own life . woman give poison to their baby , and watch foam come from their mouth as they die .     the top picture be a group of moonie that have be bless by their messiah . their mate be choose for they . the bottom picture be hitler youth . this be the leg of a suicide bomber . the thing I have to admit to myself , with great repulsion , be that I get it . I understand how this could happen . I understand how someone 's brain , how someone 's mind can come to the place where it make sense — in fact it would be wrong , when your brain be work like that — not to try to save the world through genocide .     and so what be this ? how do this work ? and how I 've come to view what happen to I be a viral , memetic infection . for those of you who be not familiar with memetic , a meme have be define as an idea that replicate in the human brain and move from brain to brain like a virus , much like a virus . the way a virus work be — it can infect and do the most damage to someone who have a compromise immune system .     in 1974 , I be young , I be naive , and I be pretty lost in my world . I be really idealistic . these easy idea to complex question be very appealing when you be emotionally vulnerable . what happen be that circular logic take over . " moon be one with god . god be go to fix all the problem in the world . all I have to do be humbly follow . because god be go to stop war and hunger — all these thing I want to do — all I have to do be humbly follow . because after all , god be [ work through ] the messiah . he be go to fix all this . " it become impenetrable . and the most dangerous part of this be that be create " we " and " they , " " right " and " wrong , " " good " and " evil . " and it make anything possible , make anything rationalizable .     and the thing be , though , if you look at my brain during those year in the moonie — neuroscience be expand exponentially , as ray kurzweil say yesterday . science be expand . we be begin to look inside the brain . and so if you look at my brain , or any brain that be infect with a viral memetic infection like this , and compare it to anyone in this room , or anyone who use critical thinking on a regular basis , I be convince it would look very , very different .     and that , strange as it may sound , give I hope . and the reason that give I hope be that the first thing be to admit that we have a problem . but it be a human problem . it be a scientific problem , if you will . it happen in the human brain . there be no evil force out there to get we . and so this be something that , through research and education , I believe that we can solve . and so the first step be to realize that we can do this together , and that there be no " we " and " they . " thank you very much . ( applause )  
   a talk about surgical robot be also a talk about surgery . and while I 've try to make my image not too graphic , keep in mind that surgeon have a different relationship with blood than normal people do , because , after all , what a surgeon do to a patient , if it be do without consent , would be a felony . surgeon be the tailor , the plumber , the carpenter — some would say the butcher — of the medical world : cut , reshape , reform , bypassing , fix . but you need to talk about surgical instrument and the evolution of surgical technology together .     so in order to give you some kind of a perspective of where we be right now with surgical robot , and where we be go to be go in the future , I want to give you a little bit of perspective of how we get to this point , how we even come to believe that surgery be ok , that this be something that be possible to do , that this kind of cut and reform be ok .     so , a little bit of perspective — about 10,000 year of perspective . this be a trephinated skull . and trephination be simply just cut a hole in the skull . and many , many hundred of skull like this have be find in archaeological site all over the world , date back five to 10 thousand year . five to 10 thousand year ! now imagine this . you be a healer in a stone age village . and you have some guy that you be not quite sure what be wrong with he — oliver sack be go to be bear way in the future . he be get some seizure disorder . and you do not understand this . but you think to yourself , " I be not quite sure what be wrong with this guy . but maybe if I cut a hole in his head I can fix it . " ( laughter ) now that be surgical thinking .     now we 've get the dawn of interventional surgery here . what be astonishing about this be , even though we do not know really how much of this be intend to be religious , or how much of it be intend to be therapeutic , what we can tell be that these patient live ! judge by the healing on the border of these hole , they live day , month , year follow trephination . and so what we be see be evidence of a refined technique that be be hand down over thousand and thousand of year , all over the world . this arise independently at site everywhere that have no communication to one another . we really be see the dawn of interventional surgery .     now we can fast forward many thousand of year into the bronze age and beyond . and we see new refine tool come out . but surgeon in these era be a little bit more conservative than their bold , trephinate ancestor . these guy confine their surgery to fairly superficial injury . and surgeon be tradesman , rather than physician . this persist all the way into and through the renaissance .     that may have save the writer , but it do not really save the surgeon terribly much . they be still a mistrusted lot . surgeon still have a bit of a pr problem , because the landscape be dominate by the itinerant barber surgeon . these be folk that travel from village to village , town to town , do surgery sort of as a form of performance art . because we be in the age before anesthesia , the agony of the patient be really as much of the public spectacle as the surgery itself . one of the most famous of these guy , frere jacque , show here do a lithotomy — which be the removal of the bladder stone , one of the most invasive surgery they do at the time — have to take less than two minute . you have to have quite a flair for the dramatic , and be really , really quick .     and so here you see he do a lithotomy . and he be credit with do over 4,000 of these public surgery , wander around in europe , which be an astonishing number , when you think that surgery must have be a last resort . I mean who would put themselves through that ? until anesthesia , the absence of sensation . with the demonstration of the morton ether inhaler at the mass . general in 1847 , a whole new era of surgery be usher in . anesthesia give surgeon the freedom to operate . anesthesia give they the freedom to experiment , to start to delve deep into the body . this be truly a revolution in surgery .     but there be a pretty big problem with this . after these very long , painstaking operation , attempt to cure thing they would never be able to touch before , the patient die . they die of massive infection . surgery do not hurt anymore , but it kill you pretty quickly . and infection would continue to claim a majority of surgical patient until the next big revolution in surgery , which be aseptic technique .     joseph lister be aepsis 's , or sterility 's , big advocate , to a very very skeptical bunch of surgeon . but eventually they do come around . the mayo brother come out to visit lister in europe . and they come back to their american clinic and they say they have learn it be as important to wash your hand before do surgery as it be to wash up afterwards . ( laughter ) something so simple . and yet , operative mortality drop profoundly .     these surgery be actually now be effective . with the patient insensitive to pain , and a sterile operating field all bet be off , the sky be the limit . you could now start do surgery everywhere , on the gut , on the liver , on the heart , on the brain . transplantation : you could take an organ out of one person , you could put it in another person , and it would work . surgeon do not have a problem with respectability anymore ; they have become god .     the era of the " big surgeon , big incision " have arrive , but at quite a cost , because they be save life , but not necessarily quality of life , because healthy people do not usually need surgery , and unhealthy people have a very hard time recover from a cut like that . the question have to be ask , " well , can we do these same surgery but through little incision ? " laparoscopy be do this kind of surgery : surgery with long instrument through small incision . and it really change the landscape of surgery . some of the tool for this have be around for a hundred year , but it have only be use as a diagnostic technique until the 1980s , when there be change in camera technology and thing like that , that allow this to be do for real operation .     so what you see — this be now the first surgical image — as we be come down the tube , this be a new entry into the body . it look very different from what you be expect surgery to look like . we bring instrument in , from two separate cut in the side , and then you can start manipulate tissue . within 10 year of the first gallbladder surgery be do laparoscopically , a majority of gallbladder surgery be be do laparoscopically — truly a pretty big revolution .     but there be casualty of this revolution . these technique be a lot hard to learn than people have anticipate . the learning curve be very long . and during that learning curve the complication go quite a bit high . surgeon have to give up their 3d vision . they have to give up their wrist . they have to give up intuitive motion in the instrument . this surgeon have over 3,000 hour of laparoscopic experience . now this be a particularly frustrating placement of the needle . but this be hard . and one of the reason why it be so hard be because the external ergonomic be terrible . you 've get these long instrument , and you be work off your centerline . and the instrument be essentially work backwards .     so what you need to do , to take the capability of your hand , and put it on the other side of that small incision , be you need to put a wrist on that instrument . and so — I get to talk about robot — the da vinci robot put just that wrist on the other side of that incision . and so here you be see the operation of this wrist . and now , in contrast to the laparoscopy , you can precisely place the needle in your instrument , and you can pass it all the way through and follow it in a trajectory . and the reason why this become so much easy be — you can see on the bottom — the hand be make the motion , and the instrument be follow those motion exactly . now , what you put between those instrument and those hand , be a large , fairly complicated robot . the surgeon be sit at a console , and control the robot with these controller . and the robot be move these instrument around , and power they , down inside the body . you have a 3d camera , so you get a 3d view .     and since this be introduce in 1999 , a lot of these robot have be out and be use for surgical procedure like a prostatectomy , which be a prostate deep in the pelvis , and it require fine dissection and delicate manipulation to be able to get a good surgical outcome . you can also sew bypass vessel directly onto a beat heart without crack the chest . this be all do in between the rib . and you can go inside the heart itself and repair the valve from the inside . you 've get these technology — thank you — ( applause ) and so you might say , " wow this be really cool ! so , smartypant , why be not all surgery be do this way ? " and there be some reason , some good reason . and cost be one of they .     I talk about the large , complicated robot . with all its bell and whistle , one of those robot will cost you about as much as a solid gold surgeon . more useful than a solid gold surgeon , but , still , it be a fairly big capital investment . but once you 've get it , your procedure cost do come down . but there be other barrier . so something like a prostatectomy — the prostate be small , and it be in one spot , and you can set your robot up very precisely to work in that one spot . and so it be perfect for something like that . and in fact if you , or anyone you know , have their prostate take out in the last couple of year , chance be it be do with one of these system . but if you need to reach more place than just one , you need to move the robot . and you need to put some new incision in there . and you need to re - set it up . and then you need to add some more port , and more . and the problem be it get time - consume , and cumbersome .     and for that reason there be many surgery that just be not be do with the da vinci . so we have to ask the question , " well how do we fix that ? " what if we could change it so that we do not have to re - set up each time we want to move somewhere different ? what if we could bring all the instrument in together in one place ? how would that change the capability of the surgeon ? and how would that change the experience for the patient ? now , to do that , we need to be able to bring a camera and instrument in together through one small tube , like that tube you see in the laparoscopy video . or , not so coincidentally , like a tube like this .     so what be go to come out of that tube be the debut of this new technology , this new robot that be go to be able to reach anywhere . ready ? so here it come . this be the camera , and three instrument . and as you see it come out , in order to actually be able to do anything useful , it can not all stay cluster up like this . it have to be able to come off of the centerline and then be able to work back toward that centerline . he be a cheeky little devil . but what this let you do be give you that all - important traction , and counter - traction , so that you can dissect , so that you can sew , so that you can do all the thing that you need to do , all the surgical task . but it be all come in through one incision . it be not so simple . but it be worth it for the freedom that this give we as we be go around . for the patient , however , it be transparent . this be all they be go to see .     it be very exciting to think where we get to go with this . we get to write the script of the next revolution in surgery . as we take these capability , and we get to go to the next place , we get to decide what our new surgery be go to be . and I think to really get the rest of the way in that revolution , we need to not just take our hand in in new way , we also need to take our eye in in new way . we need to see beyond the surface . we need to be able to guide what we be cut in a much well way .     this be a cancer surgery . one of the problem with this , even for surgeon who 've be look at this a lot , be you can not see the cancer , especially when it be hide below the surface . and so what we be start to do be we be start to inject specially design marker into the bloodstream that will target the cancer . it will go , bind to the cancer . and we can make those marker glow . and we can take special camera , and we can look at it . now we know where we need to cut , even when it be below the surface . we can take these marker and we can inject they in a tumor site . and we can follow where they flow out from that tumor site , so we can see the first place where that cancer might travel . we can inject these dye into the bloodstream , so that when we do a new vessel and we bypass a blockage on the heart , we can see if we actually make the connection , before we close that patient back up again — something that we have not be able to do without radiation before . we can light up tumor like this kidney tumor , so that you can exactly see where the boundary be between the kidney tumor and the kidney you want to leave behind , or the liver tumor and the liver you want to leave behind .     and we do not even need to confine ourselves to this macro vision . we have flexible microscopic probe that we can bring down into the body . and we can look at cell directly . I be look at nerve here . so these be nerve you see , down on the bottom , and the microscope probe that be be hold by the robotic hand , up at the top . so this be all very prototypey at this point . but you care about nerve , if you be a surgical patient . because they let you keep continence , bladder control , and sexual function after surgery , all of which be generally fairly important to the patient .     so , with the combination of these technology we can reach it all , and we can see it all . we can heal the disease . and we can leave the patient whole and intact and functional afterwards . now , I 've talk about the patient as if the patient be , somehow , someone abstract outside this room . and that be not the case . many of you , all of you maybe , will at some point , or have already , face a diagnosis of cancer , or heart disease , or some organ dysfunction that be go to buy you a date with a surgeon . and when you get to that point — I mean , these malady do not care how many book you 've write , how many company you 've start , that nobel prize you have yet to win , how much time you plan to spend with your child . these malady come for we all .     and the prospect I be offer you , of an easy surgery ... be that go to make that diagnosis any less terrifying ? I be not sure I really even want it to . because face your own mortality cause a re - evaluation of priority , and a realignment of what your goal be in life , unlike anything else . and I would never want to deprive you of that epiphany . what I want instead , be for you to be whole , intact , and functional enough to go out and save the world , after you 've decide you need to do it . and that be my vision for your future . thank you . ( applause )  
   I want to help you re - perceive what philanthropy be , what it could be , and what your relationship to it be . and in do that , I want to offer you a vision , an imagine future , if you will , of how , as the poet seamus heaney have put it , " once in a lifetime the long - for tidal wave of justice can rise up , and hope and history rhyme . "     I want to start with these word pair here . we all know which side of these we would like to be on . when philanthropy be reinvent a century ago , when the foundation form be actually invent , they do not think of themselves on the wrong side of these either . in fact they would never have think of themselves as close and set in their way , as slow to respond to new challenge , as small and risk - averse . and in fact they be not . they be reinvent charity in those time , what rockefeller call " the business of benevolence . " but by the end of the 20th century , a new generation of critic and reformer have come to see philanthropy just this way .     the thing to watch for as a global philanthropy industry come about — and that be exactly what be happen — be how the aspiration be to flip these old assumption , for philanthropy to become open and big and fast and connect , in service of the long term . this entrepreneurial energy be emerge from many quarter . and it be drive and propel forward by new leader , like many of the people here , by new tool , like the one we 've see here , and by new pressure .     I 've be follow this change for quite a while now , and participate in it . this report be our main public report . what it tell be the story of how today actually could be as historic as 100 year ago . what I want to do be share some of the cool thing that be go on with you . and as I do that , I be not go to dwell much on the very large philanthropy that everybody already know about — the gate or the soro or the google . instead , what I want to do be talk about the philanthropy of all of we : the democratization of philanthropy . this be a moment in history when the average person have more power than at any time .     what I be go to do be look at five category of experiment , each of which challenge an old assumption of philanthropy . the first be mass collaboration , represent here by wikipedia . now , this may surprise you . but remember , philanthropy be about give of time and talent , not just money . clay shirky , that great chronicler of everything network , have capture the assumption that this challenge in such a beautiful way . he say , " we have live in this world where little thing be do for love and big thing for money . now we have wikipedia . suddenly big thing can be do for love . "     watch , this spring , for paul hawken 's new book — author and entrepreneur many of you may know about . the book be call " bless unrest . " and when it come out , a series of wiki site under the label wiser , be go to launch at the same time . wise stand for world index for social and environmental responsibility . wise set out to document , link and empower what paul call the large movement , and fast - grow movement in human history : humanity 's collective immune response to today 's threat . now , all of these big thing for love — experiment — be not go to take off . but the one that do be go to be the big , the most open , the fast , the most connected form of philanthropy in human history .     second category be online philanthropy marketplace . this be , of course , to philanthropy what ebay and amazon be to commerce . think of it as peer - to - peer philanthropy . and this challenge yet another assumption , which be that organize philanthropy be only for the very wealthy . take a look , if you have not , at donorschoose . omidyar network have make a big investment in donorschoose . it be one of the well know of these new marketplace where a donor can go straight into a classroom and connect with what a teacher say they need . take a look at change the present , start by a tedster , next time you need a wedding present or a holiday present . giveindia be for a whole country . and it go on and on .     the third category be represent by warren buffet , which I call aggregated giving . it be not just that warren buffet be so amazingly generous in that historic act last summer . it be that he challenge another assumption , that every giver should have his or her own fund or foundation . there be now , today , so many new fund that be aggregate give and investing , bring together people around a common goal , to think big . one of the well know be acumen fund , lead by jacqueline novogratz , a tedster who get a big boost here at ted . but there be many other : new profit in cambridge , new school 's venture fund in silicon valley , venture philanthropy partner in washington , global fund for woman in san francisco . take a look at these . these fund be to philanthropy what venture capital , private equity , and eventually mutual fund be to investing , but with a twist — because often a community form around these fund , as it have at acuman and other place .     now , imagine for a second these first three type of experiment : mass collaboration , online marketplace , aggregate giving . and understand how they help we re - perceive what organized philanthropy be . it be not about foundation necessarily ; it be about the rest of we . and imagine the mash - up , if you will , of these thing , in the future , when these thing come together in the experiment of the future — imagine that somebody put up , say , 100 million dollar for an inspiring goal — there be 21 gift of 100 million dollar or more in the us last year , not out of the question — but only put it up if it be match by million of small gift from around the globe , thereby engage lot of people , and build visibility and engage people in the goal that be state .     I be go to look quickly at the fourth and fifth category , which be innovation , competition and social investing . they be bet a visible competition , a prize , can attract talent and money to some of the most difficult issue , and thereby speed the solution . this tackle yet another assumption , that the giver and the organization be at the center , as oppose to put the problem at the center . you can look to these innovator to help we especially with thing that require technological or scientific solution .     that leave the final category , social investing , which be really , anyway , the big of they all , represent here by xigi.net . and this , of course , tackle the big assumption of all , that business be business , and philanthropy be the vehicle of people who want to create change in the world . xigi be a new community site that be build by the community , link and map this new social capital market . it list already 1,000 entity that be offer debt and equity for social enterprise . so we can look to these innovator to help we remember that if we can leverage even a small amount of the capital that seek a return , the good that can be drive could be astonishing .     now , what be really interesting here be that we be not think our way into a new way of acting ; we be act our way into a new way of thinking . philanthropy be reorganize itself before our very eye . and even though all of the experiment and all of the big giver do not yet fulfill this aspiration , I think this be the new zeitgeist : open , big , fast , connect , and , let we also hope , long . we have get to realize that it be go to take a long time to do these thing . if we do not develop the stamina to stick with thing — whatever it be you pick , stick with it — all of this stuff be just go to be , you know , a fad .     but I be really hopeful . and I be hopeful because it be not only philanthropy that be reorganize itself , it be also whole other portion of the social sector , and of business , that be busy challenge " business as usual . " and everywhere I go , include here at ted , I feel that there be a new moral hunger that be grow . what we be see be people really wrestle to describe what be this new thing that be happen . word like " philanthrocapitalism , " and " natural capitalism , " and " philanthroentrepreneur , " and " venture philanthropy . " we do not have a language for it yet . whatever we call it , it be new , it be begin , and I think it be gong to quite significant .     and that be where my imagine future come in , which I be go to call the social singularity . many of you will realize that I be rip a bit off of the science fiction writer vernor vinge 's notion of a technological singularity , where a number of trend accelerate and converge and come together to create , really , a shockingly new reality . it may be that the social singularity ahead be the one that we fear the most : a convergence of catastrophe , of environmental degradation , of weapon of mass destruction , of pandemic , of poverty . that be because our ability to confront the problem that we face have not keep pace with our ability to create they . and as we 've hear here , it be no exaggeration to say that we hold the future of our civilization in our hand as never before .     the question be , be there a positive social singularity ? be there a frontier for we of how we live together ? our future do not have to be imagine . we can create a future where hope and history rhyme . but we have a problem . our experience to date , both individually and collectively , have not prepare we for what we be go to need to do , or who we be go to need to be . we be go to need a new generation of citizen leader willing to commit ourselves to grow and change and learn as rapidly as possible . that be why I have one last thing I want to show you .     this be a photograph take about 100 year ago of my grandfather and great - grandfather . this be a newspaper publisher and a banker . and they be great community leader . and , yes , they be great philanthropist . I keep this photograph close by to I — it be in my office — because I 've always feel a mystical connection to these two man , both of whom I never know . and so , in their honor , I want to offer you this blank slide . and I want you to imagine that this a photograph of you . and I want you to think about the community that you want to be part of create . whatever that mean to you . and I want you to imagine that it be 100 year from now , and your grandchild , or great - grandchild , or niece or nephew or god - child , be look at this photograph of you . what be the story you most want for they to tell ? thank you very much . ( applause )  
   interestingly , charles darwin be bear a very lightly pigment man , in a moderately - to - darkly pigment world . over the course of his life , darwin have great privilege . he live in a fairly wealthy home . he be raise by very supportive and interested parent . and when he be in his 20 he embark upon a remarkable voyage   on the ship the beagle . and during the course of that voyage , he see remarkable thing : tremendous diversity of plant and animal , and human . and the observation that he make on that epic journey be to be eventually distil into his wonderful book , " on the origin of specie , " publish 150 year ago .     now what be so interesting and to some , the extent , what be a bit infamous about " the origin of specie , " be that there be only one line in it about human evolution . " light will be throw on the origin of man and his history . " it be not until much long , much later , that darwin actually speak and write about human .     now in his year of travel on the beagle , and from listen to the account or explorer and naturalist , he know that skin color be one of the most important way in which people vary . and he be somewhat interested in the pattern of skin color . he know that darkly pigment people be find close to the equator ; lightly pigment people , like himself , be find close to the pole .     so what do he make of all this ? well he do not write anything about it in the origin of specie . but much later , in 1871 , he do have something to say about it . and it be quite curious . he say , " of all the difference between the race of man , the color of the skin be the most conspicuous and one of the well marked . " and he go on to say , " these difference do not coincide with correspond difference in climate . " so he have travel all around . he have see people of different color live in different place . and yet he reject the idea that human skin pigmentation be relate to the climate .     if only darwin live today . if only darwin have nasa . now , one of the wonderful thing that nasa do be it put up a variety of satellite that detect all sort of interesting thing about our environment . and for many decade now there have be a series of tom satellite that have collect datum about the radiation of the earth 's surface . the tom 7 satellite datum , show here , show the annual average ultraviolet radiation at the earth 's surface . now the really hot pink and red area be those part of the world that receive the high amount of uv during the year . the incrementally cooler color — blue , green , yellow , and finally gray — indicate area of much low ultraviolet radiation .     what be significant to the story of human skin pigmentation be just how much of the northern hemisphere be in these cool gray zone . this have tremendous implication for our understanding of the evolution of human skin pigmentation . and what darwin could not appreciate , or do not perhaps want to appreciate at the time , be that there be a fundamental relationship between the intensity of ultraviolet radiation and skin pigmentation . and that skin pigmentation itself be a product of evolution . and so when we look at a map of skin color , and predict skin color , as we know it today , what we see be a beautiful gradient from the dark skin pigmentation toward the equator , and the light one toward the pole .     what be very , very important here be that the early human evolve in high - uv environment , in equatorial africa . the early member of our lineage , the genus homo , be darkly pigment . and we all share this incredible heritage of having originally be darkly pigment , two million to one and half million year ago .     now what happen in our history ? let us first look at the relationship of ultraviolet radiation to the earth 's surface . in those early day of our evolution , look at the equator , we be bombard by high level of ultraviolet radiation . the uvc , the most energetic type , be occlude by the earth 's atmosphere . but uvb and uva especially , come in unimpeded . uvb turn out to be incredibly important . it be very destructive , but it also catalyze the production of vitamin d in the skin , vitamin d be a molecule that we very much need for our strong bone , the health of our immune system , and myriad other important function in our body .     so , live at the equator , we get lot and lot of ultraviolet radiation and the melanin — this wonderful , complex , ancient polymer compound in our skin — serve as a superb natural sunscreen . this polymer be amazing because it be present in so many different organism . melanin , in various form , have probably be on the earth a billion year , and have be recruit over and over again by evolution , as often happen . why change it if it work ?     so melanin be recruit , in our lineage , and specifically in our early ancestor evolve in africa , to be a natural sunscreen . where it protect the body against the degradation of ultraviolet radiation , the destruction , or damage to dna , and the breakdown of a very important molecule call folate , which help to fuel cell production , and reproduction in the body . so , it be wonderful . we evolve this very protective , wonderful covering of melanin .     but then we move . and human disperse — not once , but twice . major move , outside of our equatorial homeland , from africa into other part of the old world , and most recently , into the new world . when human disperse into these latitude , what do they face ? condition be significantly colder , but they be also less intense with respect to the ultraviolet regime .     so if we be somewhere in the northern hemisphere , look at what be happen to the ultraviolet radiation . we be still get a dose of uva . but all of the uvb , or you all of it , be dissipate through the thickness of the atmosphere . in the winter , when you be ski in the alp , you may experience ultraviolet radiation . but it be all uva , and , significantly , that uva have no ability to make vitamin d in your skin .     so people inhabit northern hemispheric environment be bereft of the potential to make vitamin d in their skin for most of the year . this have tremendous consequence for the evolution of human skin pigmentation . because what happen , in order to ensure health and well - being , these lineage of people disperse into the northern hemisphere lose their pigmentation . there be natural selection for the evolution of lightly pigment skin .     here we begin to see the evolution of the beautiful sepia rainbow that now characterize all of humanity . lightly pigment skin evolve not just once , not just twice , but probably three time . not just in modern human , but in one of our distant unrelated ancestor , the neanderthal . a remarkable , remarkable testament to the power of evolution . human have be on the move for a long time . and just in the last 5,000 year , in increase rate , over increase distance . here be just some of the big movement of people , voluntary movement , in the last 5,000 year .     look at some of the major latitudinal transgression : people from high uv area go to low uv and vice versa . and not all these move be voluntary . between 1520 and 1867 , 12 million , 500 people be move from high uv to low uv area in the transatlantic slave trade . now this have all sort of invidious social consequence . but it also have deleterious health consequence to people .     so what ? we 've be on the move . we be so clever we can overcome all of these seem biological impediment . well , often we be unaware of the fact that we be live in environment in which our skin be inherently poorly adapt . some of we with lightly pigment skin live in high - uv area . some of we with darkly pigment skin live in low - uv area . these have tremendous consequence for our health .     we have to , if we be lightly pigment , be careful about the problem of skin cancer , and destruction of folate in our body , by lot of sun . epidemiologist and doctor have be very good about tell we about protect our skin . what they have not be so good about instruct people be the problem of darkly pigment people live in high latitude area , or work inside all the time .     because the problem there be just as severe , but it be more sinister , because vitamin d deficiency , from a lack of ultraviolet b radiation , be a major problem . vitamin d deficiency creep up on people , and cause all sort of health problem to their bone , to their gradual decay of their immune system , or loss of immune function , and probably some problem with their mood and health , their mental health .     so we have , in skin pigmentation , one of these wonderful product of evolution that still have consequence for we today . and the social consequence , as we know , be incredibly profound . we live in a world where we have lightly and darkly pigment people live next to one another , but often bring into proximity initially as a result of very invidious social interaction . so how can we overcome this ? how can we begin to understand it ? evolution help we .     200 year after darwin 's birthday , we have the first moderately pigment president of the united states . ( applause ) how wonderful be that ? ( applause ) this man be significant for a whole host of reason . but we need to think about how he compare , in term of his pigmentation , to other people on earth . he , as one of many urban admixed population , be very emblematic of a mixed parentage , of a mixed pigmentation . and he resemble , very closely , people with moderate level of pigmentation who live in southern africa , or southeast asia .     these people have a tremendous potential to tan , to develop more pigment in their skin , as a result of exposure to sun . they also run the risk of vitamin d deficiency , if they have desk job , like that guy . so let all wish for his great health , and his awareness of his own skin pigmentation .     now what be wonderful about the evolution of human skin pigmentation , and the phenomenon of pigmentation , be that it be the demonstration , the evidence , of evolution by natural selection , right on your body . when people ask you , " what be the evidence for evolution ? " you do not have to think about some exotic example , or fossil . you just have to look at your skin .     darwin , I think , would have appreciate this , even though he eschew the importance of climate on the evolution of pigmentation during his own life . I think , be he able to look at the evidence we have today , he would understand it . he would appreciate it . and most of all , he would teach it .     you , you can teach it . you can touch it . you can understand it . take it out of this room . take your skin color , and celebrate it . spread the word . you have the evolution of the history of our specie , part of it , write in your skin . understand it . appreciate it . celebrate it . go out . be not it beautiful ? be not it wonderful ? you be the product of evolution . thank you . ( applause )  
   I love theater . I love the idea that you can transform , become somebody else and look at life with a completely new perspective . I love the idea that people will sit in one room for a couple of hour and listen . the idea that in that room at that moment , everyone , regardless of their age , their gender , their race , their color , their religion , come together . at that moment , we transcend space and time together . theater awaken our sense and open the door to our imagination . and our ability to imagine be what make we explorer . our ability to imagine make we inventor and creator and unique . I be commission in 2003 to create an original show , and begin develop " upwake . " " upwake " tell the story of zero , a modern - day business man , go to work with his life in a suitcase , stick between dream and reality and not able to decipher the two . I want " upwake " to have the same audiovisual quality as a movie would . and I want to let my imagination run wild . so I begin draw the story that be move in my head .     if antoine de saint - exupery , the author of " the little prince , " be here , he would have draw three hole inside that box and tell you your sheep be inside . because , if you look closely enough , thing will begin to appear . this be not a box ; these be the rendering of my imagination from head to paper to screen to life . in " upwake " building wear suit , zero tap dance on a giant keyboard , clone himself with a scanner , tame and whip the computer mouse , sail away into dreamscape from a single piece of paper and launch into space . I want to create environment that move and morph like an illusionist . go from one world to another in a second . I want to have humor , beauty , simplicity and complexity and use metaphor to suggest idea . at the beginning of the show , for example , zero deejay dream and reality . technology be an instrument that allow I to manifest my vision in high definition , live , on stage .     so today , I would like to talk to you about the relationship between theater and technology . let us start with technology . ( fuse blowing ) all right . let us start with theater . ( laughter ) ( buzz ) ( click , click , bang ) ( laughter ) ( applause ) thank you .     " upwake " last 52 minute and 54 second . I project 3d animation on all the four surface of the stage which I interact with . the use of animation and projection be a process of discovery . I do not use it as a special effect , but as a partner on stage . there be no special effect in " upwake , " no artifice . it be as lavish and intricate as it be simple and minimal . three hundred and forty - four frame , four and a half year and commission later , what start as a one person show become a collaborative work of nineteen most talented artist . and here be some excerpt . ( applause ) thank you .     so this be , relatively , a new show that we be now begin to tour . and in austin , texas , I be ask to give small demonstration in school during the afternoon . when I arrive at one of the school , I certainly do not expect this : six hundred kid , pack in a gymnasium , wait . I be a little nervous perform without animation , costume — really — and make - up . but the teacher come to I afterward and tell I they have not see the kid that attentive . and I think the reason why be that I be able to use their language and their reality in order to transport they into another . something happen along the way . zero become a person and not just a character in a play . zero do not speak , be neither man nor woman . zero be zero , a little hero of the 21st century , and zero can touch so many more people than I possibly could .     it be as much about bring new discipline inside this box as it be about take theater out of its box . as a street performer , I have learn that everybody want to connect . and that usually , if you be a bit extraordinary , if you be not exactly of human appearance , then people will feel inclined to participate and to feel out loud . it be as though you make something resonate within they . it be as though the mystery of the person they be interact with and connect allow they to be themselves just a bit more . because through your mask , they let theirs go .     be human be an art form . I know theater can improve the quality of people 's life , and I know theater can heal . I 've work as a doctor clown in a hospital for two year . I have see sick kid and sad parent and doctor be lift and transport in moment of pure joy . I know theater unite we . zero want to engage the generation of today and tomorrow , tell various story through different medium .     comic book . quantum physics video game . and zero want to go to the moon . in 2007 , zero launch a green campaign , suggest his friend and fan to turn off their electricity every sunday from 7:53 to 8:00 p.m. the idea be simple , basic . it be not original , but it be important , and it be important to participate .     there be a revolution . it be a human and technological revolution . it be motion and emotion . it be information . it be visual . it be musical . it be sensorial . it be conceptual . it be universal . it be beyond word and number . it be happen . the natural progression of science and art find each other to well touch and define the human experience . there be a revolution in the way that we think , in the way that we share , and the way that we express our story , our evolution . this be a time of communication , connection and creative collaboration . charlie chaplin innovate motion picture and tell story through music , silence , humor and poetry . he be social , and his character , the tramp , speak to million . he give entertainment , pleasure and relief to so many human being when they need it the most .     we be not here to question the possible ; we be here to challenge the impossible . in the science of today , we become artist . in the art of today , we become scientist . we design our world . we invent possibility . we teach , touch and move . it be now that we can use the diversity of our talent to create intelligent , meaningful and extraordinary work . it be now . ( ring ) thank you . ( applause )  
   I think I 'll start out and just talk a little bit about what exactly autism be . autism be a very big continuum that go from very severe — the child remain nonverbal — all the way up to brilliant scientist and engineer . and I actually feel at home here , because there be a lot of autism genetic here .     ( laughter )     you would not have any —     ( applause )     it be a continuum of trait . when do a nerd turn into asperger , which be just mild autism ? I mean , einstein and mozart and tesla would all be probably diagnose as autistic spectrum today . and one of the thing that be really go to concern I be get these kid to be the one that be go to invent the next energy thing that bill gate talk about this morning .     ok , now , if you want to understand autism : animal . I want to talk to you now about different way of thinking . you have to get away from verbal language . I think in picture . I do not think in language . now , the thing about the autistic mind be it attend to detail . this be a test where you either have to pick out the big letter or the little letter , and the autistic mind pick out the little letter more quickly .     and the thing be , the normal brain ignore the detail . well , if you be build a bridge , detail be pretty important because it 'll fall down if you ignore the detail . and one of my big concern with a lot of policy thing today be thing be get too abstract . people be get away from do hand - on stuff . I be really concerned that a lot of the school have take out the hand - on class , because art , and class like that — those be the class where I excel .     in my work with cattle , I notice a lot of little thing that most people do not notice would make the cattle balk . for example , this flag wave right in front of the veterinary facility . this feed yard be go to tear down their whole veterinary facility ; all they need to do be move the flag . rapid movement , contrast . in the early ' 70 when I start , I get right down in the chute to see what cattle be see . people think that be crazy . a coat on a fence would make they balk , shadow would make they balk , a hose on the floor — people be not notice these thing . a chain hang down ... and that be show very , very nicely in the movie .     in fact , I love the movie , how they duplicate all my project . that be the geek side . my drawing get to star in the movie , too . and , actually , it be call " temple grandin , " not " think in picture . "     so what be think in picture ? it be literally movie in your head . my mind work like google for image . when I be a young kid , I do not know my thinking be different . I think everybody think in picture . then when I do my book , " think in picture , " I start interview people about how they think . and I be shocked to find out that my thinking be quite different . like if I say , " think about a church steeple , " most people get this sort of generalize generic one . now , maybe that be not true in this room , but it be go to be true in a lot of different place . I see only specific picture . they flash up into my memory , just like google for picture . and in the movie , they 've get a great scene in there , where the word " shoe " be say , and a whole bunch of ' 50 and ' 60 shoe pop into my imagination .     ok , there be my childhood church ; that be specific . there be some more , fort collins . ok , how about famous one ? and they just kind of come up , kind of like this . just really quickly , like google for picture . and they come up one at a time , and then I think , " ok , well , maybe we can have it snow , or we can have a thunderstorm , " and I can hold it there and turn they into video .     now , visual thinking be a tremendous asset in my work design cattle - handle facility . and I 've work really hard on improve how cattle be treat at the slaughter plant . I be not go to go into any gucky slaughter slide . I 've get that stuff up on youtube , if you want to look at it .     ( laughter )     but one of the thing that I be able to do in my design work be I could test - run a piece of equipment in my mind , just like a virtual reality computer system . and this be an aerial view of a recreation of one of my project that be use in the movie . that be like just so super cool . and there be a lot of , kind of , asperger type and autism type work out there on the movie set , too .     ( laughter )     but one of the thing that really worry I be : where be the young version of those kid go today ? they be not end up in silicon valley , where they belong .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     one of the thing I learn very early on because I be not that social , be I have to sell my work , and not myself . and the way I sell livestock job be I show off my drawing , I show off picture of thing . another thing that help I as a little kid be , boy , in the ' 50 , you be teach manner . you be teach you can not pull the merchandise off the shelf in the store and throw it around .     when kid get to be in third or fourth grade , you might see that this kid be go to be a visual thinker , draw in perspective . now , I want to emphasize that not every autistic kid be go to be a visual thinker . now , I have this brain scan do several year ago , and I use to joke around about have a gigantic internet trunk line go deep into my visual cortex . this be tensor imaging . and my great big internet trunk line be twice as big as the control 's . the red line there be I , and the blue line be the sex and age - match control . and there I get a gigantic one , and the control over there , the blue one , have get a really small one .     and some of the research now be show that people on the spectrum actually think with the primary visual cortex . now , the thing be , the visual thinker be just one kind of mind . you see , the autistic mind tend to be a specialist mind — good at one thing , bad at something else . and where I be bad be algebra . and I be never allow to take geometry or trig . gigantic mistake . I be find a lot of kid who need to skip algebra , go right to geometry and trig .     now , another kind of mind be the pattern thinker . more abstract . these be your engineer , your computer programmer . this be pattern thinking . that pray mantis be make from a single sheet of paper — no scotch tape , no cut . and there in the background be the pattern for fold it . here be the type of thinking : photo - realistic visual thinker , like I ; pattern thinker , music and math mind . some of these oftentime have problem with reading . you also will see these kind of problem with kid that be dyslexic . you 'll see these different kind of mind . and then there be a verbal mind , they know every fact about everything .     now , another thing be the sensory issue . I be really concerned about have to wear this gadget on my face . and I come in half an hour beforehand so I could have it put on and kind of get use to it , and they get it bent so it be not hit my chin . but sensory be an issue . some kid be bother by fluorescent light ; other have problem with sound sensitivity . you know , it be go to be variable .     now , visual thinking give I a whole lot of insight into the animal mind . because think about it : an animal be a sensory - base thinker , not verbal — think in picture , think in sound , think in smell . think about how much information there be on the local fire hydrant . he know who be be there —     ( laughter )     when they be there . be they friend or foe ? be there anybody he can go mate with ? there be a ton of information on that fire hydrant . it be all very detailed information . and look at these kind of detail give I a lot of insight into animal .     now , the animal mind , and also my mind , put sensory - base information into category . man on a horse , and a man on the ground — that be view as two totally different thing . you could have a horse that be be abuse by a rider . they 'll be absolutely fine with the veterinarian and with the horseshoer , but you can not ride he . you have another horse , where maybe the horseshoer beat he up , and he 'll be terrible for anything on the ground with the veterinarian , but a person can ride he . cattle be the same way . man on a horse , a man on foot — they be two different thing . you see , it be a different picture . see , I want you to think about just how specific this be .     now , this ability to put information into category , I find a lot of people be not very good at this . when I be out troubleshoot equipment or problem with something in a plant , they do not seem to be able to figure out : " do I have a training - people issue ? or do I have something wrong with the equipment ? " in other word , categorize equipment problem from a people problem . I find a lot of people have difficulty do that . now , let us say I figure out it be an equipment problem . be it a minor problem , with something simple I can fix ? or be the whole design of the system wrong ? people have a hard time figure that out .     let us just look at something like , you know , solve problem with make airline safe . yeah , I be a million - mile flier . I do lot and lot of fly , and if I be at the faa , what would I be do a lot of direct observation of ? it would be their airplane tail . you know , five fatal wreck in the last 20 year , the tail either come off , or steering stuff inside the tail break in some way . it be tail , pure and simple . and when the pilot walk around the plane , guess what ? they can not see that stuff inside the tail . now as I think about that , I be pull up all of that specific information . it be specific . see , my thinking 's bottom - up . I take all the little piece and I put the piece together like a puzzle .     now , here be a horse that be deathly afraid of black cowboy hat . he have be abuse by somebody with a black cowboy hat . white cowboy hat , that be absolutely fine . now , the thing be , the world be go to need all of the different kind of mind to work together . we 've get to work on develop all these different kind of mind . and one of the thing that be drive I really crazy as I travel around and I do autism meeting , be I be see a lot of smart , geeky , nerdy kid , and they just be not very social , and nobody be work on develop their interest in something like science .     and this bring up the whole thing of my science teacher . my science teacher be show absolutely beautifully in the movie . I be a goofball student when I be in high school . I just do not care at all about study , until I have mr . carlock 's science class . he be now dr . carlock in the movie . and he get I challenge to figure out an optical illusion room . this bring up the whole thing of you 've get to show kid interesting stuff . you know , one of the thing that I think maybe ted ought to do be tell all the school about all the great lecture that be on ted , and there be all kind of great stuff on the internet to get these kid turn on . because I be see a lot of these geeky , nerdy kid , and the teacher out in the midwest and other part of the country when you get away from these tech area , they do not know what to do with these kid . and they be not go down the right path .     the thing be , you can make a mind to be more of a thinking and cognitive mind , or your mind can be wire to be more social . and what some of the research now have show in autism be there may by extra wiring back here in the really brilliant mind , and we lose a few social circuit here . it be kind of a trade - off between thinking and social . and then you can get to the point where it be so severe , you be go to have a person that be go to be non - verbal . in the normal human mind , language cover up the visual thinking we share with animal .     this be the work of dr . bruce miller . he study alzheimer 's patient that have frontal temporal lobe dementia . and the dementia eat out the language part of the brain . and then this artwork come out of somebody who use to install stereo in car . now , van gogh do not know anything about physics , but I think it be very interesting that there be some work do to show that this eddy pattern in this painting follow a statistical model of turbulence , which bring up the whole interesting idea of maybe some of this mathematical pattern be in our own head .     and the wolfram stuff — I be take note and write down all the search word I could use , because I think that be go to go on in my autism lecture . we 've get to show these kid interesting stuff . and they 've take out the auto - shop class and the drafting class and the art class . I mean , art be my good subject in school .     we 've get to think about all these different kind of mind , and we 've get to absolutely work with these kind of mind , because we absolutely be go to need these kind of people in the future . and let us talk about job . ok , my science teacher get I study , because I be a goofball that do not want to study . but you know what ? I be get work experience . I be see too many of these smart kid who have not learn basic thing , like how to be on time — I be teach that when I be eight year old . how to have table manner at granny 's sunday party . I be teach that when I be very , very young . and when I be 13 , I have a job at a dressmaker 's shop sewing clothe . I do internship in college , I be build thing , and I also have to learn how to do assignment .     you know , all I want to do be draw picture of horse when I be little . my mother say , " well let us do a picture of something else . " they 've get to learn how to do something else . let us say the kid be fixate on lego . let us get he work on build different thing . the thing about the autistic mind be it tend to be fixate . like if the kid love race car , let us use race car for math . let us figure out how long it take a race car to go a certain distance . in other word , use that fixation in order to motivate that kid , that be one of the thing we need to do . I really get feed up when the teacher , especially when you get away from this part of the country , they do not know what to do with these smart kid . it just drive I crazy .     what can visual thinker do when they grow up ? they can do graphic design , all kind of stuff with computer , photography , industrial design . the pattern thinker — they be the one that be go to be your mathematician , your software engineer , your computer programmer , all of those kind of job . and then you 've get the word mind ; they make great journalist , and they also make really , really good stage actor . because the thing about be autistic be , I have to learn social skill like be in a play . you just kind of ... you just have to learn it .     and we need to be work with these student . and this bring up mentor . you know , my science teacher be not an accredit teacher . he be a nasa space scientist . some state now be get it to where , if you have a degree in biology or in chemistry , you can come into the school and teach biology or chemistry . we need to be do that . because what I be observe be , the good teacher , for a lot of these kid , be out in the community college . but we need to be get some of these good teacher into the high school .     another thing that can be very , very , very successful be : there be a lot of people that may have retire from work in the software industry , and they can teach your kid . and it do not matter if what they teach they be old , because what you be do be you be light the spark . you be get that kid turn on . and you get he turn on , then you 'll learn all the new stuff . mentor be just essential . I can not emphasize enough what my science teacher do for I . and we 've get to mentor they , hire they .     and if you bring they in for internship in your company , the thing about the autism , asperger - y kind of mind , you 've get to give they a specific task . do not just say , " design new software . " you 've get to tell they something more specific : " we be design software for a phone and it have to do some specific thing , and it can only use so much memory . " that be the kind of specificity you need .     well , that be the end of my talk . and I just want to thank everybody for come . it be great to be here .     ( applause ) ( applause end )     oh — you have a question for I ? ok .     ( applause )     chris anderson : thank you so much for that . you know , you once write — I like this quote : " if by some magic , autism have be eradicate from the face of the earth , then man would still be socialize in front of a wood fire at the entrance to a cave . "     ( laughter )     temple grandin : because who do you think make the first stone spear ? it be the asperger guy , and if you be to get rid of all the autism genetic , there would be no more silicon valley , and the energy crisis would not be solve .     ( applause )     can : I want to ask you a couple other question , and if any of these feel inappropriate , it be ok just to say , " next question . " but if there be someone here who have an autistic child , or know an autistic child and feel kind of cut off from they , what advice would you give they ?     tg : well , first of all , we 've get to look at age . if you have a two , three or four - year - old , no speech , no social interaction , I can not emphasize enough : do not wait . you need at least 20 hour a week of one - to - one teaching . the thing be , autism come in different degree . about half of the people on the spectrum be not go to learn to talk , and they will not be work in silicon valley . that would not be a reasonable thing for they to do .     but then you get these smart , geeky kid with a touch of autism , and that be where you 've get to get they turn on with do interesting thing . I get social interaction through share interest — I ride horse with other kid , I make model rocket with other kid , do electronic lab with other kid . and in the ' 60 , it be glue mirror onto a rubber membrane on a speaker to make a light show . that be , like , we consider that super cool .     ( laughter )     can : be it unrealistic for they to hope or think that that child love they , as some might , as most , wish ?     tg : well , I tell you , that child will be loyal , and if your house be burn down , they be go to get you out of it .     can : wow . so most people , if you ask they what they be most passionate about , they would say thing like , " my kid " or " my lover . " what be you most passionate about ?     tg : I be passionate about that the thing I do be go to make the world a well place . when I have a mother of an autistic child say , " my kid go to college because of your book or one of your lecture , " that make I happy .     you know , the slaughter plant I work with in the ' 80 ; they be absolutely awful . I develop a really simple scoring system for slaughter plant , where you just measure outcome : how many cattle fall down ? how many got poke with the prodder ? how many cattle be moo their head off ? and it be very , very simple . you directly observe a few simple thing . it be work really well . I get satisfaction out of see stuff that make real change in the real world . we need a lot more of that , and a lot less abstract stuff .     can : totally .     ( applause )     can : when we be talk on the phone , one of the thing you say that really astonish I be that one thing you be passionate about be server farm . tell I about that .     tg : well , the reason why I get really excited when I read about that , it contain knowledge . it be library . and to I , knowledge be something that be extremely valuable . so , maybe over 10 year ago now , our library got flood . this be before the internet get really big . and I be really upset about all the book be wreck , because it be knowledge be destroy . and server farm , or datum center , be great library of knowledge .     can : temple , can I just say , it be an absolute delight to have you at ted . thank you so much .     tg : well , thank you so much . thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be jane mcgonigal . I be a game designer . I 've be make game online now for 10 year , and my goal for the next decade be to try to make it as easy to save the world in real life as it be to save the world in online game . now , I have a plan for this , and it entail convince more people , include all of you , to spend more time play big and well game .     right now we spend three billion hour a week play online game . some of you might be think , " that be a lot of time to spend playing game . maybe too much time , consider how many urgent problem we have to solve in the real world . " but actually , accord to my research at the institute for the future , actually the opposite be true . three billion hour a week be not nearly enough game play to solve the world 's most urgent problem .     in fact , I believe that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase that total dramatically . I 've calculate the total we need at 21 billion hour of game play every week . so , that be probably a bit of a counter - intuitive idea , so I 'll say it again , let it sink in : if we want to solve problem like hunger , poverty , climate change , global conflict , obesity , I believe that we need to aspire to play game online for at least 21 billion hour a week , by the end of the next decade .     ( laughter )     no . I be serious . I be .     here be why . this picture pretty much sum up why I think game be so essential to the future survival of the human specie .     ( laughter )     truly . this be a portrait by photographer phil toledano . he want to capture the emotion of gaming , so he set up a camera in front of gamer while they be play . and this be a classic gaming emotion . now , if you be not a gamer , you might miss some of the nuance in this photo . you probably see the sense of urgency , a little bit of fear , but intense concentration , deep , deep focus on tackle a really difficult problem .     if you be a gamer , you will notice a few nuance here : the crinkle of the eye up , and around the mouth be a sign of optimism , and the eyebrow up be surprise . this be a gamer who be on the verge of something call an " epic win . "     ( laughter )     oh , you 've hear of that . ok , good , so we have some gamer among we . an epic win be an outcome that be so extraordinarily positive , you have no idea it be even possible until you achieve it . it be almost beyond the threshold of imagination , and when you get there , you be shocked to discover what you be truly capable of . that be an epic win . this be a gamer on the verge of an epic win . and this be the face that we need to see on million of problem - solver all over the world as we try to tackle the obstacle of the next century — the face of someone who , against all odd , be on the verge of an epic win .     now , unfortunately this be more of the face that we see in everyday life now as we try to tackle urgent problem . this be what I call the " I be not good at life " face . this be actually I make it . can you see ? yes . good . this be I make the " I be not good at life " face . this be a piece of graffiti in my old neighborhood in berkeley , california , where I do my phd on why we be well in game than we be in real life . and this be a problem that a lot of gamer have . we feel that we be not as good in reality as we be in game .     I do not mean just good as in successful , although that be part of it . we do achieve more in game world . but I also mean good as in motivated to do something that matter — inspire to collaborate and to cooperate . and when we be in game world , I believe that many of we become the good version of ourselves — the most likely to help at a moment 's notice , the most likely to stick with a problem as long at it take , to get up after failure and try again . and in real life , when we face failure , when we confront obstacle , we often do not feel that way . we feel overcome , we feel overwhelmed , we feel anxious , maybe depressed , frustrated or cynical . we never have those feeling when we be play game , they just do not exist in game . so that be what I want to study when I be a graduate student .     what about game make it impossible to feel that we can not achieve everything ? how can we take those feeling from game and apply they to real - world work ? so I look at game like world of warcraft , which be really the ideal collaborative problem - solve environment . and I start to notice a few thing that make epic win so possible in online world .     the first thing be whenever you show up in one of these online game , especially in world of warcraft , there be lot and lot of different character who be willing to trust you with a world - save mission , right away . but not just any mission , it be a mission that be perfectly match with your current level in the game . right ? so you can do it . they never give you a challenge you can not achieve . but it be on the verge of what you be capable of , so you have to try hard . but there be no unemployment in world of warcraft ; no sit around , wring your hand — there be always something specific and important to be do . there be also ton of collaborator . everywhere you go , hundred of thousand of people ready to work with you to achieve your epic mission .     that be not something we have in real life that easily , this sense that at our fingertip be ton of collaborator . and there be this epic story , this inspiring story of why we be there , and what we be do , and we get all this positive feedback . you guy have hear of level up , +1 strength , +1 intelligence . we do not get that kind of constant feedback in real life . when I get off this stage , I be not go to have +1 speaking , and +1 crazy idea , +20 crazy idea . I do not get that feedback in real life .     now , the problem with collaborative online environment like world of warcraft be that it be so satisfying to be on the verge of an epic win all the time , we decide to spend all our time in these game world . it be just well than reality . so , so far , you all the world of warcraft gamer have spend 5.93 million year solve the virtual problem of azeroth . now , that be not necessarily a bad thing . it might sound like it be a bad thing . but to put that in context : 5.93 million year ago be when our early primate human ancestor stand up . that be the first upright primate .     so when we talk about how much time we be currently invest in play game , the only way it make sense to even think about it be to talk about time at the magnitude of human evolution , which be an extraordinary thing . but it be also apt , because it turn out that by spend all this time playing game , we be actually change what we be capable of as human being . we be evolve to be a more collaborative and hearty specie . this be true . I believe this .     so , consider this really interesting statistic ; it be recently publish by a researcher at carnegie mellon university : the average young person today in a country with a strong gamer culture will have spend 10,000 hour play online game by the age of 21 . now 10,000 hour be a really interesting number for two reason . first of all , for child in the united states , 10,080 hour be the exact amount of time you will spend in school , from fifth grade to high school graduation , if you have perfect attendance .     ( laughter )     so , we have an entire parallel track of education go on , where young people be learn as much about what it take to be a good gamer as they be learn about everything else in school . some of you have probably read malcolm gladwell 's new book " outlier , " so you would have hear of his theory of success , the " 10,000 hour " theory of success . it be base on this great cognitive - science research that say if we can master 10,000 hour of effortful study at anything by the age of 21 , we will be virtuoso at it . we will be as good at whatever we do as the great people in the world . and so , now what we be look at be an entire generation of young people who be virtuoso gamer .     so , the big question be , " what exactly be gamer get so good at ? " because if we could figure that out , we would have a virtually unprecedented human resource on our hand . this be how many people we now have in the world who spend at least an hour a day play online game . these be our virtuoso gamer , 500 million people who be extraordinarily good at something . and in the next decade , we be go to have another billion gamer who be extraordinarily good at whatever that be . if you do not know it already , this be come . the game industry be develop console that be low - energy and that work with the wireless phone network instead of broadband internet , so that gamer all over the world , particularly in india , china , brazil , can get online . they expect one billion more gamer in the next decade . it will bring we up to 1.5 billion gamer .     so I 've start to think about what these game be make we virtuoso at . here be the four thing I come up with . the first be urgent optimism . ok , think of this as extreme self - motivation . urgent optimism be the desire to act immediately to tackle an obstacle , combine with the belief that we have a reasonable hope of success . gamer always believe that an epic win be possible , and that it be always worth try , and try now . gamer do not sit around . gamer be virtuoso at weave a tight social fabric . there be a lot of interesting research that show we like people well after we play a game with they , even if they 've beat we badly . and the reason be , it take a lot of trust to play a game with someone . we trust that they will spend their time with we , that they will play by the same rule , value the same goal , stay with the game until it be over .     and so , play a game together actually build up bond and trust and cooperation . and we actually build strong social relationship as a result . blissful productivity . I love it . you know , there be a reason why the average world of warcraft gamer play for 22 hour a week — kind of a half - time job . it be because we know , when we be play a game , that we be actually happy work hard than we be relax , or hang out . we know that we be optimize as human being , to do hard and meaningful work . and gamer be willing to work hard all the time , if they be give the right work .     finally : epic meaning . gamer love to be attach to awe - inspire mission to human planetary - scale story . so , just one bit of trivium that helps put that into perspective : so , you all know wikipedia , big wiki in the world . second big wiki in the world , with nearly 80,000 article , be the world of warcraft wiki . five million people use it every month . they have compile more information about world of warcraft on the internet than any other topic cover on any other wiki in the world . they be build an epic story . they be build an epic knowledge resource about the world of warcraft .     okay , so these be four superpower that add up to one thing : gamer be super - empowered hopeful individual . these be people who believe that they be individually capable of change the world . and the only problem be , they believe that they be capable of change virtual world and not the real world . that be the problem that I be try to solve .     there be an economist name edward castronova . his work be brilliant . he look at why people be invest so much time and energy and money in online world . and he say , " we be witness what amount to no less than a mass exodus to virtual world and online game environment . " and he be an economist , so he be rational . and he say —     ( laughter )     not like I , I be a game designer ; I be exuberant . but he say that this make perfect sense , because gamer can achieve more in online world than they can in real life . they can have strong social relationship in game than they can have in real life ; they get well feedback and feel more reward in game than they do in real life . so he say , for now it make perfect sense for gamer to spend more time in virtual world than the real world . now , I also agree that that be rational , for now . but it be not , by any mean , an optimal situation . we have to start make the real world work more like a game .     I take my inspiration from something that happen 2,500 year ago . these be ancient dice , make out of sheep 's knuckle . before we have awesome game controller , we have sheep 's knuckle . and these represent the first game equipment design by human being , and if you be familiar with the work of the ancient greek historian herodotus , you might know this history , which be the history of who invent game and why . herodotus say that game , particularly dice game , be invent in the kingdom of lydia , during a time of famine .     apparently , there be such a severe famine that the king of lydia decide they have to do something crazy . people be suffer . people be fight . it be an extreme situation , they need an extreme solution . so , accord to herodotus , they invent dice game , and they set up a kingdom - wide policy : on one day , everybody would eat , and on the next day , everybody would play game . and they would be so immerse in play the dice game , because game be so engaging , and immerse we in such satisfying , blissful productivity , they would ignore the fact that they have no food to eat . and then on the next day , they would play game ; and on the next day , they would eat .     and accord to herodotus , they pass 18 year this way , survive through a famine , by eat on one day , and play game on the next . now , this be exactly , I think , how we be use game today . we be use game to escape real - world suffering — we be use game to get away from everything that be break in the real environment , everything that be not satisfy about real life , and we be get what we need from game .     but it do not have to end there . this be really exciting . accord to herodotus , after 18 year the famine be not get well , so the king decide they would play one final dice game . they divide the entire kingdom in half . they play one dice game , and the winner of that game get to go on an epic adventure . they would leave lydia , and they would go out in search of a new place to live , leave behind just enough people to survive on the resource that be available , and hopefully to take their civilization somewhere else where they could thrive .     now , this sound crazy , right ? but recently , dna evidence have show that the etruscan , who then lead to the roman empire , actually share the same dna as the ancient lydian . and so , recently , scientist have suggest that herodotus ' crazy story be actually true . and geologist have find evidence of a global cooling that last for nearly 20 year , that could have explain the famine . so this crazy story might be true . they might have actually save their culture by play game , escape to game for 18 year , and then be so inspire , and know so much about how to come together with game , that they actually save the entire civilization that way .     okay , we can do that .     ( laughter )     we 've be play warcraft since 1994 . that be the first real - time strategy game from the world of warcraft series . that be 16 year ago . they play dice game for 18 year , we 've be play warcraft for 16 year . I say we be ready for our own epic game . now , they have half the civilization go off in search of a new world , so that be where I get my 21 billion hour a week of game - play from . let us get half of we to agree to spend an hour a day playing game , until we solve real - world problem .     now , I know you be ask , " how be we go to solve real - world problem in game ? " well , that be what I 've devote my work to over the past few year , at the institute for the future . we have this banner in our office in palo alto , and it express our view of how we should try to relate to the future . we do not want to try to predict the future . what we want to do be make the future . we want to imagine the good - case scenario outcome , and then we want to empower people to make that outcome a reality . we want to imagine epic win , and then give people the mean to achieve the epic win .     I be just go to very briefly show you three game that I 've make that be an attempt to give people the mean to create epic win in their own future . this be world without oil . we make this game in 2007 . this be an online game in which you try to survive an oil shortage . the oil shortage be fictional , but we put enough online content out there for you to believe that it be real , and to live your real life as if we 've run out of oil . so when you come to the game , you sign up , tell we where you live , and then we give you real - time news video , datum feed that show you exactly how much oil cost , what be not available , how food supply be be affect , how transportation be be affect , if school be closed , if there be rioting , and you have to figure out how you would live your real life as if this be true . and then we ask you to blog about it , to post video , to post photo .     we pilot this game with 1,700 player in 2007 , and we 've track they for the three year since . and I can tell you that this be a transformative experience . nobody want to change how they live , just because it be good for the world , or because we be suppose to . but if you immerse they in an epic adventure and tell they , " we 've run out of oil . this be an amazing story and adventure for you to go on . challenge yourself to see how you would survive , " most of our player have keep up the habit that they learn in this game .     so for the next world - save game , we decide to aim high — big problem than just peak oil . we do a game call superstruct at the institute for the future . and the premise be , a supercomputer have calculate that human have only 23 year leave on the planet . this supercomputer be call the global extinction awareness system , of course . we ask people to come online — almost like a jerry bruckheimer movie . you know jerry bruckheimer movie , you form a dream team — you 've get the astronaut , the scientist , the ex - convict , and you all have something to do to save the world .     ( laughter )     but in our game , instead of just have five people on the dream team , we say , " everybody be on the dream team , and it be your job to invent the future of energy , the future of food , the future of health , the future of security and the future of the social safety net . " we have 8,000 people play that game for eight week . they come up with 500 insanely creative solution that you can go online , google " superstruct , " and see .     so , finally , the last game , we be launch it march 3rd . this be a game do with the world bank institute . if you complete the game , you will be certify by the world bank institute as a social innovator , class of 2010 . work with university all over sub - saharan africa , and we be invite they to learn social innovation skill . we 've get a graphic novel , we 've got level up in skill like local insight , knowledge networking , sustainability , vision and resourcefulness . I would like to invite all of you to please share this game with young people , anywhere in the world , particularly in develop area , who might benefit from come together to try to start to imagine their own social enterprise to save the world .     so , I be go to wrap up now . I want to ask a question . what do you think happen next ? we 've get all these amazing gamer , we 've get these game that be kind of pilot of what we might do , but none of they have save the real world yet . well I hope you will agree with I that gamer be a human resource that we can use to do real - world work , that game be a powerful platform for change . we have all these amazing superpower : blissful productivity , the ability to weave a tight social fabric , this feeling of urgent optimism and the desire for epic meaning .     I really hope that we can come together to play game that matter , to survive on this planet for another century . that be my hope , that you will join I in make and play game like this . when I look forward to the next decade , I know two thing for sure : that we can make any future we can imagine , and we can play any game we want , so I say : let the world - change game begin .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   illegal wildlife trade in brazil be one of the major threat against our fauna , especially bird , and mainly to supply the pet market with thousand of animal take from nature every month , and transport far from their origin , to be sell mainly in rio de janeiro and são paulo .     it be estimate that all kind of illegal wildlife trade in brazil withdraw from nature almost 38 million animal every year , a business worth almost two billion dollar . the police intercept these huge cargo with live animal , intend to supply the pet market , or they seize the animal directly from the people 's house , and this be how we end up , every month , with thousand of seize animal .     and for we to understand what happen with they , we be go to follow brad . in the eye of many people , after the animal be seize , they say , " yay , justice have be serve . the good guy arrive , take the cute , mistreat animal from the hand of the evil trafficker , and everyone live happily ever after . " but do they ? actually , no , and this be where many of our problem begin . because we have to figure out what to do with all these animal .     in brazil , they be usually first send to governmental triage facility , in which most of the case , the condition be as bad as with the trafficker . in 2002 , these center receive 45,000 animal , of which 37,000 be bird . and the police estimate that we seize only five percent of what be be traffic . some lucky one — and among they , brad — go to serious rehabilitation center after that . and in these place they be care for . they train their flying , they learn how to recognize the food they will find in nature , and they be able to socialize with other from the same specie . ( laughter )     but then what ? the brazil ornithological society — so now we be talk only bird — claim that we have too little knowledge about the specie in nature . therefore , it would be too risky to release these animal , both for the release and for the natural population . they also claim that we spend too many resource in their rehabilitation . follow this argument , they suggest that all the bird seize from non - threatened specie should be euthanize . however , this would mean having kill 26,267 bird , only in the state of são paulo , only in 2006 .     but , some researcher , myself include — some ngo and some people from the brazilian government — believe there be an alternative . we think that if and when the animal meet certain criterion concern their health , behavior , infer origin and whatever we know about the natural population , then technically responsible release be possible , both for the well - being of the individual , and for the conservation of the specie and their ecosystem , because we will be return gene for these population — which could be important for they in face environmental challenge — and also we could be return potential seed disperser , predator , prey , etc .     all of these be release by we . on the top , the turtle be just enjoy freedom . ( laughter ) on the middle , this guy nest a couple of week after the release . and on the bottom , my personal favorite , the little male over there , four hour after his release he be together with a wild female . so , this be not new , people have be do this around the world . but it be still a big issue in brazil . we believe we have perform responsible release . we 've register release animal mate in nature and have chick . so , these gene be indeed go back to the population .     however this be still a minority for the very lack of knowledge . so , I say , " let us study more , let us shed light on this issue , let us do whatever we can . " I be devote my career to that . and I be here to urge each and every one of you to do whatever be in your reach : talk to your neighbor , teach your child , make sure your pet be from a legal breeder . we need to act , and act now , before these one be the only one leave . thank you very much . ( applause )  
   now , I want to start with a question : when be the last time you be call " childish " ? for kid like I , be call childish can be a frequent occurrence . every time we make irrational demand , exhibit irresponsible behavior , or display any other sign of be normal american citizen , we be call childish . which really bother I . after all , take a look at these event : imperialism and colonization , world war , george w. bush . ask yourself , who be responsible ? adult .     now , what have kid do ? well , anne frank touch million with her powerful account of the holocaust . ruby bridge help to end segregation in the united states . and , most recently , charlie simpson help to raise 120,000 pound for haiti , on his little bike . so as you can see evidence by such example , age have absolutely nothing to do with it . the trait the word " childish " address be see so often in adult , that we should abolish this age - discriminatory word , when it come to criticize behavior associate with irresponsibility and irrational thinking .     ( applause )     thank you .     then again , who be to say that certain type of irrational thinking be not exactly what the world need ? maybe you 've have grand plan before , but stop yourself , think , " that be impossible , " or " that cost too much , " or " that will not benefit I . " for well or bad , we kid be not hamper as much when it come to think about reason why not to do thing . kid can be full of inspiring aspiration and hopeful thinking , like my wish that no one go hungry , or that everything be free , a kind of utopia . how many of you still dream like that , and believe in the possibility ? sometimes a knowledge of history and the past failure of utopian ideal can be a burden , because you know that if everything be free , then the food stock would become depleted and scarce and lead to chaos . on the other hand , we kid still dream about perfection . and that be a good thing , because in order to make anything a reality , you have to dream about it first .     in many way , our audacity to imagine help push the boundary of possibility . for instance , the museum of glass in tacoma , washington , my home state — yoohoo , washington !     ( applause )     have a program call kid design glass , and kid draw their own idea for glass art . the resident artist say they get some of their good idea from the program , because kid do not think about the limitation of how hard it can be to blow glass into certain shape , they just think of good idea . now , when you think of glass , you might think of colorful chihuly design , or maybe italian vase , but kid challenge glass artist to go beyond that , into the realm of brokenhearted snake and bacon boy , who you can see have meat vision .     ( laughter )     now , our inherent wisdom do not have to be insider 's knowledge . kid already do a lot of learn from adult , and we have a lot to share . I think that adult should start learn from kid . now , I do most of my speaking in front of an education crowd — teacher and student , and I like this analogy : it should not be a teacher at the head of the class , tell student , " do this , do that . " the student should teach their teacher . learn between grown - up and kid should be reciprocal . the reality , unfortunately , be a little different , and it have a lot to do with trust , or a lack of it .     now , if you do not trust someone , you place restriction on they , right ? if I doubt my old sister 's ability to pay back the 10 percent interest I establish on her last loan , I be go to withhold her ability to get more money from I , until she pay it back .     ( laughter )     true story , by the way . now , adult seem to have a prevalently restrictive attitude towards kid , from every " do not do that , do not do this " in the school handbook , to restriction on school internet use . as history point out , regime become oppressive when they be fearful about keep control . and although adult may not be quite at the level of totalitarian regime , kid have no or very little say in make the rule , when really , the attitude should be reciprocal , mean that the adult population should learn and take into account the wish of the young population .     now , what be even bad than restriction , be that adult often underestimate kid ' ability . we love challenge , but when expectation be low , trust I , we will sink to they . my own parent have anything but low expectation for I and my sister . okay , so they do not tell we to become doctor or lawyer or anything like that , but my dad do read to we about aristotle and pioneer germ - fighter , when lot of other kid be hear " the wheel on the bus go round and round . " well , we hear that one too , but " pioneer germ fighter " totally rule .     ( laughter )     I love to write from the age of four , and when I be six , my mom buy I my own laptop equip with microsoft word . thank you , bill gate , and thank you , ma . I write over 300 short story on that little laptop , and I want to get publish . instead of just scoff at this heresy that a kid want to get publish , or say wait until you be old , my parent be really supportive . many publisher be not quite so encouraging . one large child 's publisher ironically say that they do not work with child . child 's publisher not work with child ? I do not know , you be kind of alienate a large client there .     ( laughter )     one publisher , action publishing , be willing to take that leap and trust I , and to listen to what I have to say . they publish my first book , " fly finger , " you see it here . and from there on , it be go to speak at hundred of school , keynote to thousand of educator , and finally , today , speak to you .     I appreciate your attention today , because to show that you truly care , you listen . but there be a problem with this rosy picture of kid be so much well than adult . kid grow up and become adult just like you .     ( laughter )     or just like you ? really ? the goal be not to turn kid into your kind of adult , but rather , well adult than you have be , which may be a little challenging , consider your guy ' credential .     ( laughter )     but the way progress happen , be because new generation and new era grow and develop and become well than the previous one . it be the reason we be not in the dark age anymore . no matter your position or place in life , it be imperative to create opportunity for child , so that we can grow up to blow you away .     ( laughter )     adult and fellow tedster , you need to listen and learn from kid , and trust we and expect more from we . you must lend an ear today , because we be the leader of tomorrow , which mean we be go to take care of you when you be old and senile . no , just kid .     ( laughter )     no , really , we be go to be the next generation , the one who will bring this world forward . and in case you do not think that this really have meaning for you , remember that cloning be possible , and that involve go through childhood again , in which case you 'll want to be hear , just like my generation . now , the world need opportunity for new leader and new idea . kid need opportunity to lead and succeed . be you ready to make the match ? because the world 's problem should not be the human family 's heirloom .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you . thank you .  
   " people do stupid thing . that be what spread hiv . " this be a headline in a u.k . newspaper , the guardian , not that long ago . I be curious , show of hand , who agree with it ? well , one or two brave soul .     this be actually a direct quote from an epidemiologist who be be in field of hiv for 15 year , work on four continent , and you be look at she .     and I be now go to argue that this be only half true . people do get hiv because they do stupid thing , but most of they be do stupid thing for perfectly rational reason . now , " rational " be the dominant paradigm in public health , and if you put your public health nerd glass on , you 'll see that if we give people the information that they need about what be good for they and what be bad for they , if you give they the service that they can use to act on that information , and a little bit of motivation , people will make rational decision and live long and healthy life . wonderful .     that be slightly problematic for I because I work in hiv , and although I be sure you all know that hiv be about poverty and gender inequality , and if you be at ted ' 07 it be about coffee price ... actually , hiv 's about sex and drug , and if there be two thing that make human being a little bit irrational , they be erection and addiction .     ( laughter )     so , let us start with what be rational for an addict . now , I remember speak to an indonesian friend of mine , frankie . we be have lunch and he be tell I about when he be in jail in bali for a drug injection . it be someone 's birthday , and they have very kindly smuggle some heroin into jail , and he be very generously share it out with all of his colleague . and so everyone line up , all the smackhead in a row , and the guy whose birthday it be fill up the fit , and he go down and start inject people . so he inject the first guy , and then he be wipe the needle on his shirt , and he inject the next guy . and frankie say , " I be number 22 in line , and I can see the needle come down towards I , and there be blood all over the place . it be get blunter and blunter . and a small part of my brain be think , ' that be so gross and really dangerous , ' but most of my brain be think , ' please let there be some smack leave by the time it get to I . please let there be some left . ' " and then , tell I this story , frankie say , " you know ... god , drug really make you stupid . "     and , you know , you can not fault he for accuracy . but , actually , frankie , at that time , be a heroin addict and he be in jail . so his choice be either to accept that dirty needle or not to get high . and if there be one place you really want to get high , it be when you be in jail .     but I be a scientist and I do not like to make datum out of anecdote , so let us look at some datum . we talk to 600 drug addict in three city in indonesia , and we say , " well , do you know how you get hiv ? " " oh yeah , by share needle . " I mean , nearly 100 percent . yeah , by share needle . and , " do you know where you can get a clean needle at a price you can afford to avoid that ? " " oh yeah . " hundred percent . " we be smackhead ; we know where to get clean needle . " " so be you carry a needle ? " we be actually interview people on the street , in the place where they be hang out and take drug . " be you carry clean needle ? " one in four , maximum . so no surprise then that the proportion that actually use clean needle every time they inject in the last week be just about one in 10 , and the other nine in 10 be share .     so you 've get this massive mismatch ; everyone know that if they share they be go to get hiv , but they be all share anyway . so what be that about ? be it like you get a well high if you share or something ? we ask that to a junkie and they be like , " be you nuts ? " you do not want to share a needle anymore than you want to share a toothbrush even with someone you be sleep with . there be just kind of an ick factor there . " no , no . we share needle because we do not want to go to jail . " so , in indonesia at this time , if you be carry a needle and the cop round you up , they could put you into jail . and that change the equation slightly , do not it ? because your choice now be either I use my own needle now , or I could share a needle now and get a disease that be go to possibly kill I 10 year from now , or I could use my own needle now and go to jail tomorrow . and while junkie think that it be a really bad idea to expose themselves to hiv , they think it be a much bad idea to spend the next year in jail where they 'll probably end up in frankie 's situation and expose themselves to hiv anyway . so , suddenly it become perfectly rational to share needle .     now , let us look at it from a policy maker 's point of view . this be a really easy problem . for once , your incentive be align . we 've get what be rational for public health . you want people to use clean needle — and junkie want to use clean needle . so we could make this problem go away simply by make clean needle universally available and take away the fear of arrest . now , the first person to figure that out and do something about it on a national scale be that well - know , bleed heart liberal margaret thatcher . and she put in the world 's first national needle exchange program , and other country follow suit : australia , the netherland and few other . and in all of those country , you can see , not more than four percent of injector ever become infected with hiv .     now , place that do not do this — new york city for example , moscow , jakarta — we be talk , at its peak , one in two injector infect with this fatal disease . now , margaret thatcher do not do this because she have any great love for junkie . she do it because she run a country that have a national health service . so , if she do not invest in effective prevention , she be go to have pick up the cost of treatment later on , and obviously those be much high . so she be make a politically rational decision . now , if I take out my public health nerd glass here and look at these datum , it seem like a no - brainer , do not it ? but in this country , where the government apparently do not feel compel to provide health care for citizen , ( laughter ) we 've take a very different approach . so what we 've be do in the united states be review the datum — endlessly review the datum . so , these be review of hundred of study you all the big muckety - muck of the scientific pantheon in the united states , and these be the study that show needle program be effective — quite a lot of they . now , the one that show that needle program be not effective — you think that be one of these annoying dynamic slide and I be go to press my dongle and the rest of it be go to come up , but no — that be the whole slide .     ( laughter )     there be nothing on the other side . so , completely irrational , you would think . except that , wait a minute , politician be rational , too , and they be respond to what they think the voter want . so what we see be that voter respond very well to thing like this and not quite so well to thing like this .     ( laughter )     so it become quite rational to deny service to injector . now let us talk about sex . be we any more rational about sex ? well , I be not even go to address the clearly irrational position of people like the catholic church , who think somehow that if you give out condom , everyone be go to run out and have sex . I do not know if pope benedict watch tedtalk online , but if you do , I 've get news for you benedict — I carry condom all the time and I never get lay . ( laughter ) ( applause ) it be not that easy ! here , maybe you 'll have well luck .     ( applause )     okay , seriously , hiv be actually not that easy to transmit sexually . so , it depend on how much virus there be in your blood and in your body fluid . and what we 've get be a very , very high level of virus right at the beginning when you be first infect , then you start make antibody , and then it bump along at quite low level for a long time — 10 or 12 year — you have spike if you get another sexually transmit infection . but basically , nothing much be go on until you start to get symptomatic aid , and by that stage , you be not look great , you be not feel great , you be not have that much sex .     so the sexual transmission of hiv be essentially determine by how many partner you have in these very short space of time when you have peak viremia . now , this make people crazy because it mean that you have to talk about some group have more sexual partner in short space of time than other group , and that be consider stigmatize . I 've always be a bit curious about that because I think stigma be a bad thing , whereas lot of sex be quite a good thing , but we 'll leave that be . the truth be that 20 year of very good research have show we that there be group that be more likely to turnover large number of partner in a short space of time . and those group be , globally , people who sell sex and their more regular partner . they be gay man on the party scene who have , on average , three time more partner than straight people on the party scene . and they be heterosexual who come from country that have tradition of polygamy and relatively high level of female autonomy , and almost all of those country be in east or southern africa . and that be reflect in the epidemic that we have today .     you can see these horrifying figure from africa . these be all country in southern africa where between one in seven , and one in three of all adult , be infect with hiv . now , in the rest of the world , we 've get basically nothing go on in the general population — very , very low level — but we have extraordinarily high level of hiv in these other population who be at high risk : drug injector , sex worker and gay man . and you 'll note , that be the local datum from los angeles : 25 percent prevalence among gay man . of course , you can not get hiv just by have unprotected sex . you can only hiv by have unprotected sex with a positive person .     in most of the world , these few prevention failure notwithstanding , we be actually do quite well these day in commercial sex : condom use rate be between 80 and 100 percent in commercial sex in most country . and , again , it be because of an alignment of the incentive . what be rational for public health be also rational for individual sex worker because it be really bad for business to have another sti . no one want it . and , actually , client do not want to go home with a drip either . so essentially , you be able to achieve quite high rate of condom use in commercial sex .     but in " intimate " relation it be much more difficult because , with your wife or your boyfriend or someone that you hope might turn into one of those thing , we have this illusion of romance and trust and intimacy , and nothing be quite so unromantic as the , " my condom or your , darle ? " question . so in the face of that , you really need quite a strong incentive to use condom .     this , for example , this gentleman be call joseph . he be from haiti and he have aid . and he be probably not have a lot of sex right now , but he be a reminder in the population , of why you might want to be use condom . this be also in haiti and be a reminder of why you might want to be have sex , perhaps . now , funnily enough , this be also joseph after six month on antiretroviral treatment . not for nothing do we call it the lazarus effect . but it be change the equation of what be rational in sexual decision - making . so , what we 've get — some people say , " oh , it do not matter very much because , actually , treatment be effective prevention because it lower your viral load and therefore make it more difficult to transmit hiv . " so , if you look at the viremia thing again , if you do start treatment when you be sick , well , what happen ? your viral load come down . but compare to what ? what happen if you be not on treatment ? well , you die , so your viral load go to zero . and all of this green stuff here , include the spike — which be because you could not get to the pharmacy , or you run out of drug , or you go on a three day party binge and forget to take your drug , or because you 've start to get resistance , or whatever — all of that be virus that would not be out there , except for treatment .     now , be I say , " oh , well , great prevention strategy . let us just stop treat people . " of course not , of course not . we need to expand antiretroviral treatment as much as we can . but what I be do be call into question those people who say that more treatment be all the prevention we need . that be simply not necessarily true , and I think we can learn a lot from the experience of gay man in rich country where treatment have be widely available for go on 15 year now . and what we 've see be that , actually , condom use rate , which be very , very high — the gay community respond very rapidly to hiv , with extremely little help from public health nerd , I would say — that condom use rate have come down dramatically since treatment for two reason really : one be the assumption of , " oh well , if he be infect , he be probably on med , and his viral load be go to be low , so I be pretty safe . "     and the other thing be that people be simply not as scared of hiv as they be of aid , and rightly so . aids be a disfigure disease that kill you , and hiv be an invisible virus that make you take a pill every day . and that be boring , but be it as boring as have to use a condom every time you have sex , no matter how drunk you be , no matter how many popper you 've take , whatever ? if we look at the datum , we can see that the answer to that question be , mmm .     so these be datum from scotland . you see the peak in drug injector before they start the national needle exchange program . then it come way down . and both in heterosexual — mostly in commercial sex — and in drug user , you 've really get nothing much go on after treatment begin , and that be because of that alignment of incentive that I talk about early . but in gay man , you 've get quite a dramatic rise start three or four year after treatment become widely available . this be of new infection .     what do that mean ? it mean that the combined effect of be less worried and have more virus out there in the population — more people live long , healthy life , more likely to be getting lay with hiv — be outweigh the effect of low viral load , and that be a very worrisome thing . what do it mean ? it mean we need to be do more prevention the more treatment we have .     be that what be happen ? no , and I call it the " compassion conundrum . " we 've talk a lot about compassion the last couple of day , and what be happen really be that people be unable quite to bring themselves to put in good sexual and reproductive health service for sex worker , unable quite to be give out needle to junkie . but once they 've go from be transgressive people whose behavior we do not want to condone to be aid victim , we come over all compassionate and buy they incredibly expensive drug for the rest of their life . it do not make any sense from a public health point of view .     I want to give what be very nearly the last word to ine . ines be a a transgender hooker on the street of jakarta ; she be a chick with a dick . why do she do that job ? well , of course , because she be force into it because she do not have any well option , etc . , etc . and if we could just teach she to sew and get she a nice job in a factory , all would be well . this be what factory worker earn in an hour in indonesia : on average , 20 cent . it vary a bit province to province . I do speak to sex worker , 15,000 of they for this particular slide , and this be what sex worker say they earn in an hour . so it be not a great job , but for a lot of people it really be quite a rational choice . okay , ines .     we 've get the tool , the knowledge and the cash , and commitment to prevent hiv too .     ine : so why be prevalence still rise ? it be all politic . when you get to politic , nothing make sense .     elizabeth pisani : " when you get to politic , nothing make sense . " so , from the point of view of a sex worker , politician be make no sense . from the point of view of a public health nerd , junkie be do dumb thing . the truth be that everyone have a different rationale . there be as many different way of be rational as there be human being on the planet , and that be one of the glory of human existence . but those way of be rational be not independent of one another , so it be rational for a drug injector to share needle because of a stupid decision that be make by a politician , and it be rational for a politician to make that stupid decision because they be respond to what they think the voter want . but here be the thing : we be the voter . we be not all of they , of course , but ted be a community of opinion leader . and everyone who be in this room , and everyone who be watch this out there on the web , I think , have a duty to demand of their politician that we make policy base on scientific evidence and on common sense . it be go to be really hard for we to individually affect what be rational for every frankie and every ine out there , but you can at least use your vote to stop politician do stupid thing that spread hiv .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   ( music )     ♫ my age be three hundred ♫     ♫ and seventy - two ♫     ♫ I think with the deep regret ♫     ♫ how I use to pick up     and voraciously chew ♫     ♫ the dear little boy     that I meet ♫     ♫ I 've eat they raw     in their holiday suit , ♫     ♫ eat they     curry with rice , ♫     ♫ I 've eat they bake     in their jacket and boot , ♫     ♫ and find they exceedingly nice . ♫     ♫ but now that my jaw     be too weak for such fare , ♫     ♫ I think it be increasingly rude ♫     ♫ to do such a thing     when I be quite well aware ♫     ♫ little boy do not like     be chew . ♫     ♫ little boy do not like     be chew . ♫     ( music )     ♫ so now I contentedly live upon eel , ♫     ♫ and try to do nothing amiss ♫     ♫ and pass all the time     I can spare from my meal ♫     ♫ in innocent slumber like this , ♫     ♫ innocent slumber     like this . ♫     ( applause )     I suppose I owe you an explanation . I 've be work on a project for the last six year adapt child 's poetry to music . and that be a poem by charles edward carryl , who be a stockbroker in new york city for 45 year , but in the evening , he write nonsense for his child . and this book be one of the most famous book in america for about 35 year . " the sleepy giant , " which be the song that I just sing , be one of his poem . now , we be go to do other poem for you , and here be a preview of some of the poet . this be rachel field , robert graves — a very young robert grave — christina rossetti . ghost , right ? have nothing to say to we , obsolete , go — not so . what I really enjoy about this project be revive these people 's word . take they off the dead , flat page . bring they to life , bring they to light . so , what we be go to do next be a poem that be write by nathalia crane . nathalia crane be a little girl from brooklyn . when she be 10 year old in 1927 , she publish her first book of poem call " the janitor 's boy . " here she be . and here be her poem .     ( music )     ♫ oh , I be in love     with the janitor 's boy , ♫     ♫ and the janitor 's boy     be in love with I . ♫     ♫ oh , I be in love     with the janitor 's boy , ♫     ♫ and the janitor 's boy     be in love with I . ♫     ♫ he be go to hunt for a desert isle ♫     ♫ in our geography . ♫     ♫ a desert isle     with spicy tree ♫     ♫ somewhere in sheepshead bay ; ♫     ♫ a right nice place ,     just fit for two ♫     ♫ where we can live always . ♫     ♫ oh , I be in love     with the janitor 's boy , ♫     ♫ and the janitor 's boy , ♫     he be busy as can be ; ♫     ♫ down in the cellar he be make a raft ♫     ♫ out of an old settee . ♫     ♫ he 'll carry I off ,     I know that he will , ♫     ♫ for his hair be exceedingly red ; ♫     ♫ and the only thing     that occur to I ♫     ♫ be to dutifully shiver in bed . ♫     ♫ and on the day that we sail ,     I will leave a little note ♫     ♫ for my parent I hate to annoy : ♫     ♫ " I have fly to an island     in the bay ♫     ♫ with my janitor 's     red haired - boy . " ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ I be go to sail away ♫     ♫ go to sheepshead bay ♫     ♫ with my janitor 's red - haired boy . ♫     ♫ on an old settee ♫     ♫ my red - haired boy and I ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy . ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ♫ the janitor 's red - haired boy ♫     ( applause )     the next poem be by e.e . cumming , " maggie and milly and molly and may . "     ( music )     ♫ maggie and milly ,     molly and may ♫     ♫ they go down to the beach     one day to play ♫     ♫ and maggie discover     a shell that sing ♫     ♫ so sweetly she could not remember     her trouble ♫     ♫ maggie and milly ,     molly and may ♫     ♫ maggie and milly ,     molly and may ♫     ♫ milly befriend     a strand star ♫     ♫ whose ray ,     whose ray ♫     ♫ five languid finger     be ♫     ( music )     ♫ maggie and milly ,     molly and may ♫     ♫ maggie and milly ,     molly and may ♫     ( music )     ♫ molly be chase     by a horrible thing ♫     ♫ which race     sideway blow ♫     ♫ blow ♫     ♫ blow ♫     ♫ may come home     with a smooth , round stone ♫     ♫ small as a world     and as large as alone ♫     ( music )     ♫ for whatever we lose     like a you or a I ♫     ♫ always ourselves     that we find     at the sea ♫     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     the next poem be " if no one ever marry I . " it be write by laurence alma - tadema . she be the daughter of a very , very famous dutch painter who have make his fame in england . he go there after the death of his wife of smallpox and bring his two young child . one be his daughter , laurence . she write this poem when she be 18 year old in 1888 , and I look at it as kind of a very sweet feminist manifesto tinge with a little bit of defiance and a little bit of resignation and regret .     ( music )     ♫ well , if no one ever marry I ♫     ♫ and I do not see why they should , ♫     ♫ nurse say I be not pretty , ♫     ♫ and you know I be seldom good ,     seldom good — ♫     ♫ well , if no one ever marry I ♫     ♫ I shall not mind very much ; ♫     ♫ buy a squirrel in a cage ♫     ♫ and a little rabbit - hutch . ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ I 'll have a cottage near a wood ♫     ♫ and a you all my own ♫     ♫ a little lamb quite clean and tame ♫     ♫ that I can take to town . ♫     ♫ and when I be really get old — ♫     ♫ and 28 or nine — ♫     ♫ buy myself a little orphan girl ♫     ♫ and bring she up as mine . ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ if no one marry I ♫     ♫ well , if no one marry I ♫     ♫ marry I ♫     ♫ well , if no one marry I ♫     ♫ marry I ♫     ♫ well , if no one marry I ♫ thank you .     ( applause ) thank you .     I become very curious about the poet after spend six year with they , and start to research their life , and then decide to write a book about it . and the burn question about alma - tadema be : do she marry ? and the answer be no , which I find in the london time archive . she die alone in 1940 in the company of her book and her dear friend . gerard manley hopkin , a saintly man . he become a jesuit . he convert from his anglican faith . he be move to by the tractarian movement , the oxford movement , otherwise know as — and he become a jesuit priest . he burn all his poetry at the age of 24 and then do not write another poem for at least seven year because he could not rectify the life of a poet with the life of a priest . he die typhoid fever at the age of 44 , I believe , 43 or 44 . at the time , he be teach classic at trinity college in dublin . a few year before he die , after he have resume write poetry , but in secret , he confess to a friend in a letter that I find when I be do my research : " I 've write a verse . it be to explain death to a child , and it deserve a piece of plain - song music . " and my blood freeze when I read that because I have write the plain - song music 130 year after he have write the letter . and the poem be call , " spring and fall . "     ♫ margaret ,     be you grieve ♫     ♫ over goldengrove     unleave , by and by ? ♫     ♫ leave , like the thing     of man , you ♫     ♫ with your fresh thought care for ,     can you ? ♫     ♫ but as the heart grow old ♫     ♫ it will come to such sight     much cold ♫     ♫ by and by ,     nor spare a sigh ♫     ♫ though world of     wanwood leafmeal lie ; ♫     ♫ and yet you will weep     and you 'll know why . ♫     ♫ no matter child , the name : ♫     ♫ sorrow 's spring be all the same ♫     ♫ they be all the same . ♫     ♫ nor mouth have     nor no mind express ♫     ♫ what heart hear of ,     ghost have guess : ♫     ♫ it be the blight     man be bear for , ♫     ♫ it be margaret     that you mourn for ♫     thank you so much .     ( applause )     ( music )     I would like to thank everybody , all the scientist , the philosopher , the architect , the inventor , the biologist , the botanist , the artist ... everyone that blow my mind this week . thank you . ( applause )     ♫ oh , a li la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la la la la la la ♫ ( applause )     ♫ la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la la la la ♫     ♫ la la la li la la la la la ♫     ♫ you 've be so kind and     generous ♫     ♫ I do not know how you keep on give . ♫     ♫ and for your kindness ,     I be in debt to you . ♫     ♫ and for your selflessness ,     my admiration . ♫     ♫ and for everything you 've do ,     you know I be bind ; ♫     ♫ I be bind to thank for it ♫     ♫ la li la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la li la la la ♫ ( clapping )     ♫ la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la la ♫     ♫ la li la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la li la la ♫     ♫ and you ♫     ♫ now you 've be so kind and ... ♫     curb the enthusiasm , just a little bit . just bring it down a little . ( laughter ) it be my turn . I still have two minute . ( laughter ) okay , we be go to start that verse again .     ♫ well , you 've be so ... ♫     that be innovative , do not you think ? calm the audience down ; I be suppose to be whip you into a frenzy , and I ,     " that be enough . sh . " ( laughter )     ♫ now , you 've be kind and ... ♫     I be go to sing this to bill gate . ( laughter ) I have so much admiration for he .     ♫ now , you 've be so kind and     generous , ♫     ♫ I do not know how you keep on give . ♫     ♫ and for your kindness     I be in debt to you . ♫     ♫ and I never could have come     this far without you . ♫     ♫ so for everything you 've do ,     you know I be bind ♫     ♫ I be bind to thank you for it ♫ ( clapping )     ♫ la li la la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la li la li la la la ♫     ♫ la li la la la ♫     ♫ oh , I want to thank you for so many gift ♫     ♫ you give in love with tenderness ♫     ♫ thank you ♫     ♫ I want to thank you     for your generosity ♫     ♫ the love and the honesty that you give I ♫     ♫ I want to thank you     show my gratitude , ♫ my love     and my respect for you ♫     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     you know what ? I 'll show you how to clap to this song . ( laughter ) ( clapping )     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     it work well , right ?     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     ♫ I want to thank you ♫     ♫ ooh hoo ♫     ♫ ooh hoo ♫     ♫ ooh hoo ♫     ♫ ooh hoo ♫     let us bring it down . decrescendo . gradually , bring it down , bring it down .     ♫ I want to thank you , thank you ♫     finger popping , be not no stop . thank you so much .     ( applause )  
   first of all , I be a geek . I be an organic food - eating , carbon footprint - minimizing , robotic surgery geek . and I really want to build green , but I be very suspicious of all of these well - mean article , people long on moral authority and short on datum , tell I how to do these kind of thing . and so I have to figure this out for myself . for example : be this evil ? I have drop a blob of organic yogurt from happy self - actualize local cow on my counter top , and I grab a paper towel and I want to wipe it up . but can I use a paper towel ? ( laughter )     the answer to this can be find in embody energy . this be the amount of energy that go into any paper towel or embody water , and every time I use a paper towel , I be use this much virtual energy and water . wipe it up , throw it away . now , if I compare that to a cotton towel that I can use a thousand time , I do not have a whole lot of embody energy until I wash that yogurty towel . this be now operate energy . so if I throw my towel in the washing machine , I 've now put energy and water back into that towel ... unless I use a front - loading , high - efficiency washing machine , ( laughter ) and then it look a little bit well . but what about a recycled paper towel that come in those little half sheet ? well , now a paper towel look well . screw the paper towel . let us go to a sponge . I wipe it up with a sponge , and I put it under the running water , and I have a lot less energy and a lot more water . unless you be like I and you leave the handle in the position of hot even when you turn it on , and then you start to use more energy . or bad , you let it run until it be warm to rinse out your towel . and now all bet be off .     ( laughter )     so what this say be that sometimes the thing that you least expect — the position in which you put the handle — have a big effect than any of those other thing that you be try to optimize . now imagine someone as twisted as I try to build a house . ( laughter ) that be what my husband and I be do right now . and so , we want to know , how green could we be ? and there be a thousand and one article out there tell we how to make all these green trade - off . and they be just as suspect in tell we to optimize these little thing around the edge and miss the elephant in the living room . now , the average house have about 300 megawatt hour of embody energy in it ; this be the energy it take to make it — million and million of paper towel .     we want to know how much well we could do . and so , like many people , we start with a house on a lot , and I be go to show you a typical construction on the top and what we be do on the bottom . so first , we demolish it . it take some energy , but if you deconstruct it — you take it all apart , you use the bit — you can get some of that energy back . we then dig a big hole to put in a rainwater catchment tank to take our yard water independent . and then we pour a big foundation for passive solar . now , you can reduce the embody energy by about 25 percent by use high fly ash concrete . we then put in framing . and so this be frame — lumber , composite material — and it be kind of hard to get the embody energy out of that , but it can be a sustainable resource if you use fsc - certify lumber .     we then go on to the first thing that be very surprising . if we put aluminum window in this house , we would double the energy use right there . now , pvc be a little bit well , but still not as good as the wood that we choose . we then put in plumbing , electrical and hvac , and insulate . now , spray foam be an excellent insulator — it fill in all the crack — but it be pretty high embody energy , and , spray - in cellulose or blue jean be a much low energy alternative to that . we also use straw bale infill for our library , which have zero embody energy . when it come time to sheetrock , if you use ecorock it be about a quarter of the embody energy of standard sheetrock .     and then you get to the finish , the subject of all of those " go green " article , and on the scale of a house they almost make no difference at all . and yet , all the press be focus on that . except for floor . if you put carpeting in your house , it be about a tenth of the embody energy of the entire house , unless you use concrete or wood for a much low embody energy . so now we add in the final construction energy , we add it all up , and we 've build a house for less than half of the typical embody energy for build a house like this .     but before we pat ourselves too much on the back , we have pour 151 megawatt hour of energy into construct this house when there be a house there before . and so the question be : how could we make that back ? and so if I run my new energy - efficient house forward , compare with the old , non - energy - efficient house , we make it back in about six year . now , I probably would have upgrade the old house to be more energy - efficient , and in that case , it would take I more about 20 year to break even . now , if I have not pay attention to embody energy , it would have take we over 50 year to break even compare to the upgrade house . so what do this mean ? on the scale of my portion of the house , this be equivalent to about as much as I drive in a year , it be about five time as much as if I go entirely vegetarian . but my elephant in the living room fly . clearly , I need to walk home from ted . but all the calculation for embody energy be on the blog .     and , remember , it be sometimes the thing that you be not expect to be the big change that be .     thank you . ( applause )  
   the brilliant playwright , adrienne kennedy , write a volume call " people who lead to my play . " and if I be to write a volume , it would be call , " artist who have lead my exhibition " because my work , in understand art and in understand culture , have come by follow artist , by look at what artist mean and what they do and who they be . j.j . from " good time , " ( applause ) significant to many people of course because of " dy - no - mite , " but perhaps more significant as the first , really , black artist on primetime tv . jean - michel basquiat , important to I because [ he be ] the first black artist in real time that show I the possibility of who and what I be about to enter into .     my overall project be about art — specifically , about black artist — very generally about the way in which art can change the way we think about culture and ourselves . my interest be in artist who understand and rewrite history , who think about themselves within the narrative of the large world of art , but who have create new place for we to see and understand . I be show two artist here ,   glenn ligon and kara walker , two of many who really form for I the essential question that I want to bring as a curator to the world . I be interested in the idea of why and how I could create a new story , a new narrative in art history and a new narrative in the world . and to do this , I know that I have to see the way in which artist work , understand the artist 's studio as a laboratory , imagine , then , reinvent the museum as a think tank and look at the exhibition as the ultimate white paper — ask question , provide the space to look and to think about answer .     in 1994 , when I be a curator at the whitney museum , I make an exhibition call black male . it look at the intersection of race and gender in contemporary american art . it seek to express the way in which art could provide a space for dialogue — complicated dialogue , dialogue with many , many point of entry — and how the museum could be the space for this contest of idea . this exhibition include over 20 artist of various age and race , but all look at black masculinity from a very particular point of view . what be significant about this exhibition be the way in which it engage I in my role as a curator , as a catalyst , for this dialogue . one of the thing that happen very distinctly in the course of this exhibition be I be confront with the idea of how powerful image can be in people 's understanding   of themselves and each other .     I be show you two work , one on the right by leon golub , one on the left by robert colescott . and in the course of the exhibition — which be contentious , controversial and ultimately , for I , life - change in my sense of what art could be — a woman come up to I on the gallery floor to express her concern about the nature of how powerful image could be and how we understand each other . and she point to the work on the left to tell I how problematic this image be , as it relate , for she , to the idea of how black people have be represent . and she point to the image on the right as an example , to I , of the kind of dignity that need to be portray to work against those image in the medium . she then assign these work racial identity , basically say to I that the work on the right , clearly , be make by a black artist , the work on the left , clearly , by a white artist , when , in effect , that be the opposite case : bob colescott , african - american artist ; leon golub , a white artist . the point of that for I be to say — in that space , in that moment — that I really , more than anything , want to understand how image could work , how image do work , and how artist provide a space big than one that we could imagine in our day - to - day life to work through these image .     fast - forward and I end up in harlem ; home for many of black america , very much the psychic heart of the black experience , really the place where the harlem renaissance exist . harlem now , sort of explain and thinking of itself in this part of the century , look both backwards and forwards ... I always say harlem be an interesting community because , unlike many other place , it think of itself in the past , present and the future simultaneously ; no one speak of it just in the now . it be always what it be and what it can be . and , in think about that , then my second project , the second question I ask be : can a museum be a catalyst in a community ? can a museum house artist and allow they to be change agent as community rethink themselves ? this be harlem , actually , on january 20th , think about itself in a very wonderful way .     so I work now at the studio museum in harlem , think about exhibition there , think about what it mean to discover art 's possibility . now , what do this mean to some of you ? in some case , I know that many of you be involve in cross - cultural dialogue , you be involve in idea of creativity and innovation . think about the place that artist can play in that — that be the kind of incubation and advocacy that I work towards , in work with young , black artist . think about artist , not as content provider , though they can be brilliant at that , but , again , as real catalyst .     the studio museum be found in the late 60 . and I bring this up because it be important to locate this practice in history . to look at 1968 , in the incredible historic moment that it be , and think of the arc that have happen since then , to think of the possibility that we be all privileged to stand in today and imagine that this museum that come out of a moment of great protest and one that be so much about examine the history and the legacy of important african - american artist to the history of art in this country like jacob lawrence , norman lewis , romare bearden .     and then , of course , to bring we to today . in 1975 , muhammad ali give a lecture at harvard university . after his lecture , a student get up and say to he , " give we a poem . " and mohammed ali say , " I , we . " a profound statement about the individual and the community . the space in which now , in my project of discovery , of think about artist , of try to define what might be black art cultural movement of the 21st century . what that might mean for cultural movement all over this moment , the " I , we " seem incredibly prescient totally important .     to this end , the specific project that have make this possible for I be a series of exhibition , all title with an f — freestyle , frequency and flow — which have set out to discover and define the young , black artist work in this moment who I feel strongly will continue to work over the next many year . this series of exhibition be make specifically to try and question the idea of what it would mean now , at this point in history , to see art as a catalyst ; what it mean now , at this point in history , as we define and redefine culture , black culture specifically in my case , but culture generally . I name this group of artist around an idea , which I put out there call post - black , really mean to define they as artist who come and start their work now , look back at history but start in this moment , historically .     it be really in this sense of discovery that I have a new set of question that I be ask . this new set of question be : what do it mean , right now , to be african - american in america ? what can artwork say about this ? where can a museum exist as the place for we all to have this conversation ? really , most exciting about this be think about the energy and the excitement that young artist can bring . their work for I be about , not always just simply about the aesthetic innovation that their mind imagine , that their vision create and put out there in the world , but more , perhaps , importantly , through the excitement of the community that they create as important voice that would allow we right now to understand our situation , as well as in the future . I be continually amazed by the way in which the subject of race can take itself in many place that we do not imagine it should be . I be always amazed by the way in which artist be willing to do that in their work . it be why I look to art . it be why I ask question of art . it be why I make exhibition .     now , this exhibition , as I say , 40 young artist do over the course of eight year , and for I it be about consider the implication . it be consider the implication of what this generation have to say to the rest of we . it be consider what it mean for these artist to be both out in the world as their work travel , but in their community as people who be see and think about the issue that face we . it be also about think about the creative spirit and nurture it , and imagine , particularly in urban america , about the nurturing of the spirit .     now , where , perhaps , do this end up right now ? for I , it be about re - imagine this cultural discourse in an international context . so the last iteration of this project have be call flow , with the idea now of create a real network of artist around the world ; really look , not so much from harlem and out , but look across , and flow look at artist all bear on the continent of africa . and as many of we think about that continent and think about what if mean to we all in the 21st century , I have begin that look through artist , through artwork , and imagine what they can tell we about the future , what they tell we about our future , and what they create in their sense of offer we this great possibility of watch that continent emerge as part of our big dialogue . so , what do I discover     when I look at artwork ? what do I think about when I think about art ? I feel like the privilege I 've have as a curator be not just the discovery of new work , the discovery of exciting work . but , really , it have be what I 've discover about myself and what I can offer in the space of an exhibition , to talk about beauty , to talk about power , to talk about ourselves , and to talk and speak to each other . that be what make I get up every day and want to think about this generation of black artist and artist around the world .     thank you . ( applause )  
   so here it be . you can check : I be short , I be french , I have a pretty strong french accent , so that be go to be clear in a moment .     maybe a sobering thought and something you all know about . and I suspect many of you give something to the people of haiti this year . and there be something else I believe in the back of your mind you also know . that is , every day , 25,000 child die of entirely preventable cause . that be a haiti earthquake every eight day . and I suspect many of you probably give something towards that problem as well , but somehow it do not happen with the same intensity .     so why be that ? well , here be a thought experiment for you . imagine you have a few million dollar that you 've raise — maybe you be a politician in a develop country and you have a budget to spend . you want to spend it on the poor : how do you go about it ? do you believe the people who tell you that all we need to do be to spend money ? that we know how to eradicate poverty , we just need to do more ? or do you believe the people who tell you that aid be not go to help , on the contrary it might hurt , it might exacerbate corruption , dependence , etc . ? or maybe you turn to the past . after all , we have spend billion of dollar on aid . maybe you look at the past and see . have it do any good ?     and , sadly , we do not know . and bad of all , we will never know . and the reason be that — take africa for example . african have already get a lot of aid . these be the blue bar . and the gdp in africa be not make much progress . okay , fine . how do you know what would have happen without the aid ? maybe it would have be much bad , or maybe it would have be well . we have no idea . we do not know what the counterfactual be . there be only one africa .     so what do you do ? to give the aid , and hope and pray that something come out of it ? or do you focus on your everyday life and let the earthquake every eight day continue to happen ? the thing be , if we do not know whether we be do any good , we be not any well than the medieval doctor and their leech . sometimes the patient get well , sometimes the patient die . be it the leech ? be it something else ? we do not know .     so here be some other question . they be small question , but they be not that small . immunization , that be the cheap way to save a child 's life . and the world have spend a lot of money on it : the gavi and the gate foundation be each pledge a lot of money towards it , and develop country themselves have be do a lot of effort . and yet , every year at least 25 million child do not get the immunization they should get . so this be what you call a " last mile problem . " the technology be there , the infrastructure be there , and yet it do not happen . so you have your million . how do you use your million to solve this last mile problem ?     and here be another question : malaria . malaria kill almost 900,000 people every year , most of they in sub - saharan africa , most of they under five . in fact , that be the lead cause of under - five mortality . we already know how to kill malaria , but some people come to you and say , " you have your million . how about bed net ? " bed net be very cheap . for 10 dollar , you can manufacture and ship an insecticide treat bed net and you can teach someone to use they . and , not only do they protect the people who sleep under they , but they have these great contagion benefit . if half of a community sleep under a net , the other half also benefit because the contagion of the disease spread . and yet , only a quarter of kid at risk sleep under a net . society should be willing to go out and subsidize the net , give they for free , or , for that matter , pay people to use they because of those contagion benefit . " not so fast , " say other people . " if you give the net for free , people be not go to value they . they be not go to use they , or at least they be not go to use they as bed net , maybe as fishing net . " so , what do you do ? do you give the net for free to maximize coverage , or do you make people pay in order to make sure that they really value they ? how do you know ?     and a third question : education . maybe that be the solution , maybe we should send kid to school . but how do you do that ? do you hire teacher ? do you build more school ? do you provide school lunch ? how do you know ?     so here be the thing . I can not answer the big question , whether aid do any good or not . but these three question , I can answer they . it be not the middle age anymore , it be the 21st century . and in the 20th century , randomize , control trial have revolutionize medicine by allow we to distinguish between drug that work and drug that do not work . and you can do the same randomize , control trial for social policy . you can put social innovation to the same rigorous , scientific test that we use for drug . and in this way , you can take the guesswork out of policy - making by know what work , what do not work and why . and I 'll give you some example with those three question .     so I start with immunization . here be udaipur district , rajasthan . beautiful . well , when I start work there , about one percent of child be fully immunize . that be bad , but there be place like that . now , it be not because the vaccine be not there — they be there and they be free — and it be not because parent do not care about their kid . the same child that be not immunize against measle , if they do get measle , parent will spend thousand of rupee to help they . so you get these empty village subcenter and crowded hospital . so what be the problem ? well , part of the problem , surely , be people do not fully understand . after all , in this country as well , all sort of myth and misconception go around immunization . so if that be the case , that be difficult , because persuasion be really difficult . but maybe there be another problem as well . it be go from intention to action . imagine you be a mother in udaipur district , rajasthan . you have to walk a few kilometer to get your kid immunize . and maybe when you get there , what you find be this : the subcenter be closed . ao you have to come back , and you be so busy and you have so many other thing to do , you will always tend to postpone and postpone , and eventually it get too late . well , if that be the problem , then that be much easy . because a , we can make it easy , and b , we can maybe give people a reason to act today , rather than wait till tomorrow .     so these be simple idea , but we do not know . so let us try they . so what we do be we do a randomized , control trial in 134 village in udaipur district . so the blue dot be select randomly . we make it easy — I 'll tell you how in a moment . in the red dot , we make it easy and give people a reason to act now . the white dot be comparison , nothing change . so we make it easy by organize this monthly camp where people can get their kid immunize . and then you make it easy and give a reason to act now by add a kilo of lentil for each immunization . now , a kilo of lentil be tiny . it be never go to convince anybody to do something that they do not want to do . on the other hand , if your problem be you tend to postpone , then it might give you a reason to act today rather than later .     so what do we find ? well , beforehand , everything be the same . that be the beauty of randomization . afterwards , the camp — just have the camp — increase immunization from six percent to 17 percent . that be full immunization . that be not bad , that be a good improvement . add the lentil and you reach to 38 percent . so here you 've get your answer . make it easy and give a kilo of lentil , you multiply immunization rate by six . now , you might say , " well , but it be not sustainable . we can not keep give lentil to people . " well , it turn out it be wrong economic , because it be cheap to give lentil than not to give they . since you have to pay for the nurse anyway , the cost per immunization end up be cheap if you give incentive than if you do not .     how about bed net ? should you give they for free , or should you ask people to pay for they ? so the answer hinge on the answer to three simple question . one be : if people must pay for a bed net , be they go to purchase they ? the second one be : if I give bed net for free , be people go to use they ? and the third one be : do free bed net discourage future purchase ? the third one be important because if we think people get use to handout , it might destroy market to distribute free bed net . now this be a debate that have generate a lot of emotion and angry rhetoric . it be more ideological than practical , but it turn out it be an easy question . we can know the answer to this question . we can just run an experiment . and many experiment have be run , and you all have the same result , so I be just go to talk to you about one .     and this one that be in kenya , they go around and distribute to people voucher , discount voucher . so people with their voucher could get the bed net in the local pharmacy . and some people get 100 percent discount , and some people get 20 percent discount , and some people get 50 percent discount , etc . and now we can see what happen . so , how about the purchasing ? well , what you can see be that when people have to pay for their bed net , the coverage rate really fall down a lot . so even with partial subsidy , three dollar be still not the full cost of a bed net , and now you only have 20 percent of the people with the bed net , you lose the health immunity , that be not great . second thing be , how about the use ? well , the good news be , people , if they have the bed net , will use the bed net regardless of how they get it . if they get it for free , they use it . if they have to pay for it , they use it . how about the long term ? in the long term , people who get the free bed net , one year later , be offer the option to purchase a bed net at two dollar . and people who get the free one be actually more likely to purchase the second one than people who do not get a free one . so people do not get use to handout ; they get use to net . maybe we need to give they a little bit more credit .     so , that be for bed net . so you will think , " that be great . you know how to immunize kid , you know how to give bed net . " but what politician need be a range of option . they need to know : out of all the thing I could do , what be the good way to achieve my goal ? so suppose your goal be to get kid into school . there be so many thing you could do . you could pay for uniform , you could eliminate fee , you could build latrine , you could give girl sanitary pad , etc . , etc . so what be the good ? well , at some level , we think all of these thing should work . so , be that sufficient ? if we think they should work intuitively , should we go for they ? well , in business , that be certainly not the way we would go about it .     consider for example transport good . before the canal be invent in britain before the industrial revolution , good use to go on horse cart . and then canal be build , and with the same horseman and the same horse , you could carry ten time as much cargo . so should they have continue to carry the good on the horse cart , on the ground , that they would eventually get there ? well , if that have be the case , there would have be no industrial revolution . so why should not we do the same with social policy ? in technology , we spend so much time experiment , fine - tuning , get the absolute cheap way to do something , so why be not we do that with social policy ?     well , with experiment , what you can do be answer a simple question . suppose you have 100 dollar to spend on various intervention . how many extra year of education do you get for your hundred dollar ? now I be go to show you what we get with various education intervention . so the first one be if you want the usual suspect , hire teacher , school meal , school uniform , scholarship . and that be not bad . for your hundred dollar , you get between one and three extra year of education . thing that do not work so well be bribe parent , just because so many kid be already go to school that you end up spend a lot of money . and here be the most surprising result . tell people the benefit of education , that be very cheap to do . so for every hundred dollar you spend do that , you get 40 extra year of education . and , in place where there be worm , intestinal worm , cure the kid of their worm . and for every hundred dollar , you get almost 30 extra year of education . so this be not your intuition , this be not what people would have go for , and yet , these be the program that work . we need that kind of information , we need more of it , and then we need to guide policy .     so now , I start from the big problem , and I could not answer it . and I cut it into small question , and I have the answer to these small question . and they be good , scientific , robust answer .     so let us go back to haiti for a moment . in haiti , about 200,000 people die — actually , a bit more by the late estimate . and the response of the world be great : two billion dollar got pledge just last month , so that be about 10,000 dollar per death . that do not sound like that much when you think about it . but if we be willing to spend 10,000 dollar for every child under five who die , that would be 90 billion per year just for that problem . and yet it do not happen . so , why be that ? well , I think what part of the problem be that , in haiti , although the problem be huge , somehow we understand it , it be localize . you give your money to doctor without border , you give your money to partner in health , and they 'll send in the doctor , and they 'll send in the lumber , and they 'll helicopter thing out and in . and the problem of poverty be not like that . so , first , it be mostly invisible ; second , it be huge ; and third , we do not know whether we be do the right thing . there be no silver bullet . you can not helicopter people out of poverty . and that be very frustrating .     but look what we just do today . I give you three simple answer to three question : give lentil to immunize people , provide free bed net , deworm child . with immunization or bed net , you can save a life for 300 dollar per life save . with deworming , you can get an extra year of education for three dollar . so we can not eradicate poverty just yet , but we can get start . and maybe we can get start small with thing that we know be effective .     here be an example of how this can be powerful . deworme . worm have a little bit of a problem grab the headline . they be not beautiful and do not kill anybody . and yet , when the young global leader in davos show the number I give you , they start deworm the world . and thank to deworm the world , and the effort of many country government and foundation , 20 million school - aged child got deworme in 2009 . so this evidence be powerful . it can prompt action .     so we should get start now . it be not go to be easy . it be a very slow process . you have to keep experiment , and sometimes ideology have to be trump by practicality . and sometimes what work somewhere do not work elsewhere . so it be a slow process , but there be no other way . these economic I be propose , it be like 20th century medicine . it be a slow , deliberative process of discovery . there be no miracle cure , but modern medicine be save million of life every year , and we can do the same thing .     and now , maybe , we can go back to the big question that I start with at the beginning . I can not tell you whether the aid we have spend in the past have make a difference , but can we come back here in 30 year and say , " what we have do , it really prompt a change for the well . " I believe we can and I hope we will .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I have a daughter , mulan . and when she be eight , last year , she be do a report for school or she have some homework about frog . and we be at this restaurant , and she say , " so , basically , frog lie egg and the egg turn into tadpole , and tadpole turn into frog . "     and I say , " yeah . you know , I be not really up on my frog reproduction that much . it be the female , I think , that lie the egg , and then the male fertilize they . and then they become tadpole and frog . "     and she say , " what ? only the female have egg ? "     and I say , " yeah . "     and she go , " and what be this fertilize ? "     so I kind of say , " oh , it be this extra ingredient , you know , that you need to create a new frog from the mom and dad frog . " ( laughter )     and she say , " oh , so be that true for human too ? "     and I think , " okay , here we go . " I do not know it would happen so quick , at eight . I be try to remember all the guidebook , and all I could remember be , " only answer the question they be ask . do not give any more information . " ( laughter ) so I say , " yes . "     and she say , " and where do , um , where do human woman , like , where do woman lay their egg ? "     and I say , " well , funny you should ask . ( laughter ) we have evolve to have our own pond . we have our very own pond inside our body . and we lay our egg there , we do not have to worry about other egg or anything like that . it be our own pond . and that be how it happen . "     and she go , " then how do they get fertilize ? "     and I say , " well , man , through their penis , they fertilize the egg by the sperm come out . and you go through the woman 's vagina . "     and so we be just eat , and her jaw just drop , and she go , " mom ! like , where you go to the bathroom ? "     and I say , " I know . I know . " ( laughter ) that be how we evolve . it do seem odd . it be a little bit like have a waste treatment plant right next to an amusement park ... bad zoning , but ... " ( laughter )     she be like , " what ? " and she go , " but mom , but man and woman can not ever see each other naked , mom . so how could that ever happen ? "     and then I go , " well , " and then I put my margaret mead hat on . " human male and female develop a special bond , and when they be much old , much , much old than you , and they have a very special feeling , then they can be naked together . "     and she say , " mom , have you do this before ? "     and I say , " yes . "     and she say , " but mom , you can not have kid . " because she know that I adopt she and that I can not have kid .     and I say , " yes . "     and she say , " well , you do not have to do that again . "     and I say , " ... "     and then she say , " but how do it happen when a man and woman be together ? like , how do they know that be the time ? mom , do the man just say , ' be now the time to take off my pant ? ' "     ( laughter )     and I say , " yes . " ( laughter ) " that be exactly right . that be exactly how it happen . "     so we be drive home and she be look out the window , and she go , " mom . what if two just people see each other on the street , like a man and a woman , they just start do it . would that ever happen ? "     and I say , " oh , no . human be so private . oh ... "     and then she go , " what if there be like a party , and there be just like a whole bunch of girl and a whole bunch of boy , and there be a bunch of man and woman and they just start do it , mom ? would that ever happen ? "     and I say , " oh , no , no . that be not how we do it . "     then we get home and we see the cat . and she go , " mom , how do cat do it ? "     and I go , " oh , it be the same . it be basically the same . "     and then she got all catch up in the leg . " but how would the leg go , mom ? I do not understand the leg . " she go , " mom , everyone can not do the split . "     and I go , " I know , but the leg ... " and I be probably like , " the leg get work out . "     and she go , " but I just can not understand it . "     so I go , " you know , why do not we go on the internet , and maybe we can see ... like on wikipedia . " ( laughter )     so we go online , and we put in " cat mating . " and , unfortunately , on youtube , there be many cat mate video . and we watch they and I be so thankful , because she be just like , " wow ! this be so amazing . " she go , " what about dog ? " so we put in dog mating , and , you know , we be watch it , and she be totally absorb .     and then she go , " mom , do you think they would have , on the internet , any human mate ? " ( laughter ) and then I realize that I have take my little eight year old 's hand , and take she right into internet porn . ( laughter )     and I look into this trusting , love face , and I say , " oh , no . that would never happen . "     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you . I be so happy to be here .  
   today , I want you to look at child who become suicide bomber through a completely different len . in 2009 , there be 500 bomb blast across pakistan . I spend the year work with child who be train to become suicide bomber and with taliban recruiter , try to understand how the taliban be convert these child into live ammunition and why these child be actively sign up to their cause .     I want you to watch a short video from my late documentary film , " child of the taliban . "     ( singing )     the taliban now run their own school . they target poor family and convince the parent to send their child . in return , they provide free food and shelter and sometimes pay the family a monthly stipend . we 've obtain a propaganda video make by the taliban . young boy be teach justification for suicide attack and the execution of spy .     I make contact with a child from swat who study in a madrassa like this . hazrat ali be from a poor farming family in swat . he join the taliban a year ago when he be 13 .     how do the taliban in your area get people to join they ?     hazrat ali : they first call we to the mosque and preach to we . then they take we to a madrassa and teach we thing from the koran .     sharmeen obaid chinoy : he tell I that child be then give month of military training .     ha : they teach we to use machine gun , kalashnikov , rocket launcher , grenade , bomb . they ask we to use they only against the infidel . then they teach we to do a suicide attack .     soc : would you like to carry out a suicide attack ?     ha : if god give I strength .     soc : I , in my research , have see that the taliban have perfect the way in which they recruit and train child , and I think it be a five - step process . step one be that the taliban prey on family that be large , that be poor , that live in rural area . they separate the parent from the child by promise to provide food , clothing , shelter to these child . then they ship they off , hundred of mile away to hard - line school that run along the taliban agenda .     step two : they teach the child the koran , which be islam 's holy book , in arabic , a language these child do not understand and can not speak . they rely very heavily on teacher , who I have personally see distort the message to these child as and when it suit their purpose to . these child be explicitly forbid from read newspaper , listen to radio , read any book that the teacher do not prescribe they . if any child be find violate these rule , he be severely reprimand . effectively , the taliban create a complete blackout of any other source of information for these child .     step three : the taliban want these child to hate the world that they currently live in . so they beat these child — I have see it ; they feed they twice a day dry bread and water ; they rarely allow they to play game ; they tell they that , for eight hour at a time , all they have to do be read the koran . the child be virtual prisoner ; they can not leave , they can not go home . their parent be so poor , they have no resource to get they back .     step four : the old member of the taliban , the fighter , start talk to the young boy about the glory of martyrdom . they talk to they about how when they die , they will be receive up with lake of honey and milk , how there will be 72 virgin wait for they in paradise , how there will be unlimited food , and how this glory be go to propel they to become hero in their neighborhood . effectively , this be the brainwash process that have begin .     step five : I believe the taliban have one of the most effective mean of propaganda . their video that they use be intercut with photograph of man and woman and child die in iraq and afghanistan and in pakistan . and the basic message be that the western power do not care about civilian death , so those people who live in area and support government that work with western power be fair game . that be why pakistani civilian , over 6,000 of whom have be kill in the last two year alone , be fair game . now these child be prime to become suicide bomber . they be ready to go out and fight because they 've be tell that this be effectively their only way to glorify islam .     I want you to watch another excerpt from the film .     this boy be call zenola . he blow himself up , kill six . this boy be call sadik . he kill 22 . this boy be call messoud . he kill 28 . the taliban be run suicide school , prepare a generation of boy for atrocity against civilian .     do you want to carry out a suicide attack ?     boy : I would love to . but only if I get permission from my dad . when I look at suicide bomber young than I , or my age , I get so inspire by their terrific attack .     soc : what blessing would you get from carry out a suicide attack ?     boy : on the day of judgment , god will ask I , " why do you do that ? " I will answer , " my lord ! only to make you happy ! I have lay down my life fight the infidel . " then god will look at my intention . if my intention be to eradicate evil for islam , then I will be reward with paradise .     singer : ♫ on the day of judgment ♫ ♫ my god will call I ♫ ♫ my body will be put back together ♫ ♫ and god will ask I why I do this ♫     soc : I leave you all with this thought : if you grow up in these circumstance , face with these choice , would you choose to live in this world or in the glorious afterlife ? as one taliban recruiter tell I , " there will always be sacrificial lamb in this war . "     thank you . ( applause )  
   so , if you be in the audience today , or maybe you be watch this talk in some other time or place , you be a participant in the digital right ecosystem . whether you be an artist , a technologist , a lawyer or a fan , the handling of copyright directly impact your life . right management be no long simply a question of ownership , it be a complex web of relationship and a critical part of our cultural landscape . youtube care deeply about the right of content owner , but in order to give they choice about what they can do with copy , mashup and more , we need to first identify when copyright material be upload to our site .     let us look at a specific video so you can see how it work . two year ago , record artist chris brown release the official video of his single " forever . " a fan see it on tv , record it with her camera phone , and upload it to youtube . because sony music have register chris brown 's video in our content i d system , within second of attempt to upload the video , the copy be detect , give sony the choice of what to do next .     but how do we know that the user 's video be a copy ? well , it start with content owner deliver asset into our database , along with a usage policy that tell we what to do when we find a match . we compare each upload against all of the reference file in our database . this heat map be go to show you how the brain of the system work . here we can see the original reference file be compare to the user generate content . the system compare every moment of one to the other to see if there be a match . this mean that we can identify a match even if the copy use be just a portion of the original file , play it in slow motion and have degrade audio and video quality . and we do this every time that a video be upload to youtube . and that be over 20 hour of video every minute . when we find a match , we apply the policy that the right owner have set down .     and the scale and the speed of this system be truly breathtaking . we be not just talk about a few video , we be talk about over 100 year of video every day , between new upload and the legacy scan we regularly do across all of the content on the site . when we compare those hundred year of video , we be compare it against million of reference file in our database . it would be like 36,000 people stare at 36,000 monitor each and every day , without so much as a coffee break .     now , what do we do when we find a match ? well , most right owner , instead of blocking , will allow the copy to be publish . and then they benefit through the exposure , advertising and link sale . remember chris brown 's video " forever " ? well , it have its day in the sun and then it drop off the chart , and that look like the end of the story , but sometime last year , a young couple got marry . this be their wedding video . you may have see it .     ( music )     what be amazing about this be , if the processional of the wedding be this much fun , can you imagine how much fun the reception must have be ? I mean , who be these people ? I totally want to go to that wedding .     so their little wedding video go on to get over 40 million view . and instead of sony blocking , they allow the upload to occur . and they put advertising against it and link from it to itune . and the song , 18 month old , go back to number four on the itune chart . so sony be generate revenue from both of these . and jill and kevin , the happy couple , they come back from their honeymoon and find that their video have go crazy viral . and they 've end up on a bunch of talk show , and they 've use it as an opportunity to make a difference . the video 's inspire over 26,000 dollar in donation to end domestic violence . the " jk wedding [ entrance ] dance " become so popular that nbc parody it on the season finale of " the office , " which just go to show , it be truly an ecosystem of culture . because it be not just amateur borrow from big studio , but sometimes big studio borrow back .     by empower choice , we can create a culture of opportunity . and all it take to change thing around be to allow for choice through right identification . so why have no one ever solve this problem before ? it be because it be a big problem , and it be complicated and messy . it be not uncommon for a single video to have multiple right owner . there be musical label . there be multiple music publisher . and each of these can vary by country . there be lot of case where we have more than one work mash together . so we have to manage many claim to the same video .     youtube 's content i d system address all of these case . but the system only work through the participation of right owner . if you have content that other be upload to youtube , you should register in the content i d system , and then you 'll have the choice about how your content be use . and think carefully about the policy that you attach to that content . by simply block all reuse , you 'll miss out on new art form , new audience , new distribution channel and new revenue stream .     but it be not just about dollar and impression . just look at all the joy that be spread through progressive right management and new technology . and I think we can all agree that joy be definitely an idea worth spread .     thank you . ( applause )  
   I be go to begin by recite a poem . " oh beloved dentist : your rubber finger in my mouth ... your voice so soft and muffled ... low the mask , dear dentist , low the mask . "     ( laughter )     okay , in this presentation , I be go to be put the right side of your brain through a fairly serious workout . you be go to see a lot of imagery , and it be not always connect to what I be talk about , so I need you to kind of split your brain in half and let the image flow over one side and listen to I on the other . so I be one of those people with a transformative personal story . six year ago , after 20 year in graphic design and typography , I change the way I be work and the way most graphic designer work to pursue a more personal approach to my work , with only the humble attempt to simply make a living do something that I love . but something weird happen . I become bizarrely popular . my current work seem to resonate with people in a way that have so take I by surprise that I still frequently wonder what in the hell be go on . and I be slowly come to understand that the appeal of what I do may be connect to why I do it .     these day , I call myself a graphic artist . so where my work as a graphic designer be to follow strategy , my work now follow my heart and my interest with the guidance of my ego to create work that be mutually beneficial to myself and a client . now , this be heresy in the design world . the ego be not suppose to be involve in graphic design . but I find that for myself , without exception , the more I deal with the work as something of my own , as something that be personal , the more successful it be as something that be compelling , interesting and sustain . so I exist somewhat outside of the mainstream of design thinking . where other might look at measurable result , I tend to be interested in more ethereal quality , like " do it bring joy ? " " be there a sense of wonder ? " and " do it invoke curiosity ? "     this be a scientific diagram , by the way . I do not have time to explain it , but it have to do with dna and rna . so I have a particular imaginative approach to visual work . the thing that interest I when I be work be visual structure , surprise and anything that require figure thing out . so for this reason , I be particularly draw to system and pattern . I be go to give you a couple of example of how my brain work .     this be a piece that I do for the guardian newspaper in the u.k . they have a magazine that they call g2 . and this be for their puzzle special in 2007 . and puzzle it be . I start by create a series of tile unit . and these tiling unit , I design specifically so that they would contain part of letterform within their shape so that I could then join those piece together to create letter and then word within the abstract patterning . but then as well , I be able to just flip they , rotate they and combine they in different way to create either regular pattern or abstract pattern . so here be the word puzzle again . and here it be with the abstract surrounding . and as you can see , it be extremely difficult to read . but all I have to do be fill certain area of those letterform and I can bring those word out of the background pattern . but maybe that be a little too obvious . so then I can add some color in with the background and add a bit more color in with the word themselves , and this way , work with the art director , I be able to bring it to just the right point that it be puzzle for the audience — they can figure out that there be something they have to read — but it be not impossible for they to read .     I be also interested in work with unusual material and common material in unusual way . so this require figure out how to get the most out of something 's innate property and also how to bend it to my will . so ultimately , my goal be to create something unexpected . to this end , I have work in sugar for stefan sagmeister , three - time ted speaker . and this project begin essentially on my kitchen table . I 've be eat cereal for breakfast all of my life . and for that same amount of time , I 've be spill sugar on the table and just kind of play with it with my finger . and eventually I use this technique to create a piece of artwork . and then I use it again to create six piece for stefan 's book , " thing in my life I 've learn so far . " and these be create without sketch , just freehand , by put the sugar down on a white surface and then manipulate it to get the word and design out of it . recently , I 've also make some rather highbrow baroque border out of lowbrow pasta . and this be for a chapter that I be do in a book , and the chapter be on honor . so it be a little bit unexpected , but , in a way , it refer to the macaroni art that child make for their parent or they make in school and give to their parent , which be in itself a form of honor . this be what you can do with some household tinfoil . okay , well , it be what I can do with some household tinfoil .     ( laughter )     I be very interested in wonder , in design as an impetus to inquire . to say I wonder be to say I question , I ask . and to experience wonder be to experience awe . so I be currently work on a book , which play with both sense of the word , as I explore some of my own idea and inquiry in a visual display of rather peacock - like grandeur . the world be full of wonder . but the world of graphic design , for the most part , be not . so I be use my own writing as a kind of testing ground for a book that have an interdependency between word and image as a kind of seductive force . I think that one of the thing that religion get right be the use of visual wonder to deliver a message . I think this true marriage of art and information be woefully underuse in adult literature , and I be mystify as to why visual wealth be not more commonly use to enhance intellectual wealth . when we look at work like this , we tend to associate they with child 's literature . there be an implication that ornamental graphic detract from the seriousness of the content . but I really hope to have the opportunity to change that perception . this book be take rather a long time , but I be nearly do .     for some reason , I think it would be a good idea to put an intermission in my talk . and this be it — just to give you and I a moment to catch up .     ( laughter )     so I do these valentine . I 've be send out valentine on a fairly large scale since 2005 . these be my valentine from 2005 and 2006 . and I start by do just a single image like this and send they out to each person . but in 2007 , I get the cockamamie idea to hand - draw each valentine for everyone on my mailing list . I reduce my mailing list to 150 people . and I draw each person their own unique valentine and put their name on it and number it and sign it and send it out . believe it or not , I devise this as a timesaving method . I be very busy in the beginning of that year , and I do not know when I be go to find time to design and print a single valentine . and I think that I could kind of do this piecemeal as I be travel . it do not exactly work out that way . there be a long story to this , but I do get they all do in time , and they be extremely well receive . I get an almost 100 percent response rate . ( laughter ) and those who do not respond will never receive anything from I ever again .     ( laughter )     last year , I take a more conceptual approach to the valentine . I have this idea that I want people to receive a kind of mysterious love letter , like a find fragment in their mailbox . I want it to be something that be not address to they or sign by I , something that cause they to wonder what on earth this thing be . and I specifically write four page that do not connect . there be four different version of this . and I write they so that they begin in the middle of a sentence , end in the middle of a sentence . and they be on the one hand , universal , so I avoid specific name or place , but on the other hand , they be personal . so I want people to really get the sense that they have receive something that could have be a love letter to they . and I be just go to read one of they to you .     " you 've never really be sure of this , but I can assure you that this quirk you be so self - conscious of be intensely endearing . just please accept that this piece of you escape with your smile , and those of we who notice be happy to catch it in pass . time spend with you be like chase and catch small bird , but without the scratch and bird shit . " ( laughter ) " that be to say , your thought and word flit and dart , disconcertedly elusive at time , but when catch and examine — ahh , such a wonder , such a delightful reward . there be no pass time with you , only collect — the collecting of moment with the hope for preservation and at the same time release . impossible ? I do not think so . I know this make you embarrassed . I be certain I can see you blush . but I just have to tell you because sometimes I hear your self - doubt , and it be so crush to think that you may not know how truly wonderful you be , how inspiring and delightful and really , truly the most completely ... "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     so valentine 's day be come up in a couple of day , and these be currently arrive in mailbox all around the world . this year , I get , what I really have to say be a rather brilliant idea , to laser cut my valentine out of use christmas card . so I solicit friend to send I their use christmas card , and I make 500 of these . each one of they be completely different . I be just really , really thrill with they . I do not have that much else to say , but they turn out really well .     I do spend a lot of time on my work . and one of the thing that I 've be think about recently be what be worth while . what be it that be worth spend my time on and my life on in this way ? work in the commercial world , this be something that I do have to struggle with at time . and yes , sometimes I be sway by money . but ultimately , I do not consider that a worthy goal . what make something worthwhile for I be the people I work for or with , the condition I work under and the audience that I be able to reach . so I might ask : " who be it for ? " " what do it say ? " and " what do it do ? "     you know , I have to tell you , it be really difficult for someone like I to come up on stage at this conference with these unbelievably brilliant mind , who be think these really big - picture , world - change , life - change idea and technology . and it be very , very common for designer and people in the visual art to feel that we be not contribute enough , or bad , that all we be do be contribute to landfill . here I be ; I be show you some pretty visual and talk about aesthetic . but I 've come to believe that truly imaginative visual work be extremely important in society .     just in the way that I be inspire by book and magazine of all kind , conversation I have , movie , so I also think , when I put visual work out there into the mass medium , work that be interesting , unusual , intriguing , work that maybe open up that sense of inquiry in the mind , that I be seed the imagination of the populace . and you just never know who be go to take something from that and turn it into something else , because inspiration be cross - pollinating . so a piece of mine may inspire a playwright or a novelist or a scientist , and that in turn may be the seed that inspire a doctor or a philanthropist or a babysitter . and this be not something that you can quantify or track or measure , and we tend to undervalue thing in society that we can not measure .     but I really believe that a fully operate , rich society need these seed come from all direction and all discipline in order to keep the gear of inspiration and imagination flow and cycling and grow . so that be why I do what I do , and why I spend so much time and effort on it , and why I work in the commercial , public sphere , as oppose to the isolated , private sphere of fine art : because I want as many people as possible to see my work , notice it , be draw into it , and be able to take something from it . and I actually really feel that it be worthwhile to spend my valuable and limited time on this earth in this way . and I thank you for allow I to show it to you .     ( applause )  
   trees epitomize stasis . tree be root in the ground in one place for many human generation , but if we shift our perspective from the trunk to the twig , tree become very dynamic entity , move and grow . and I decide to explore this movement by turn tree into artist . I simply tie the end of a paintbrush onto a twig . I wait for the wind to come up and hold up a canvas , and that produce art . the piece of art you see on your left be paint by a western red cedar and that on your right by a douglas fir , and what I learn be that different specie have different signature , like a picasso versus a monet .     but I be also interested in the movement of tree and how this art might let I capture that and quantify it , so to measure the distance that a single vine maple tree — which produce this painting — move in a single year , I simply measure and sum each of those line . I multiply they by the number of twig per branch and the number of branch per tree and then divide that by the number of minute per year . and so I be able to calculate how far a single tree move in a single year . you might have a guess . the answer be actually 186,540 mile , or seven time around the globe . and so simply by shift our perspective from a single trunk to the many dynamic twig , we be able to see that tree be not simply static entity , but rather extremely dynamic .     and I begin to think about way that we might consider this lesson of tree , to consider other entity that be also static and stick , but which cry for change and dynamicism , and one of those entity be our prison . prison , of course , be where people who break our law be stick , confine behind bar . and our prison system itself be stick . the united states have over 2.3 million incarcerate man and woman . that number be rise . of the 100 incarcerate people that be release , 60 will return to prison . fund for education , for training and for rehabilitation be decline , so this despair cycle of incarceration continue . I decide to ask whether the lesson I have learn from tree as artist could be apply to a static institution such as our prison , and I think the answer be yes .     in the year 2007 , I start a partnership with the washington state department of correction . work with four prison , we begin bring science and scientist , sustainability and conservation project to four state prison . we give science lecture , and the man here be choose to come to our science lecture instead of watch television or weightlifting . that , I think , be movement . we partner with the nature conservancy for inmate at stafford creek correctional center to grow endangered prairie plant for restoration of relic prairie area in washington state . that , I think , be movement . we work with the washington state department of fish and wildlife to grow endanger frog — the oregon spot frog — for later release into protect wetland . that , I think , be movement .     and just recently , we 've begin to work with those man who be segregate in what we call supermax facility . they 've incur violent infraction by become violent with guard and with other prisoner . they be keep in bare cell like this for 23 hour a day . when they have meeting with their review board or mental health professional , they be place in immobile booth like this . for one hour a day they be bring to these bleak and bland exercise yard . although we can not bring tree and prairie plant and frog into these environment , we be bring image of nature into these exercise yard , put they on the wall , so at least they get contact with visual image of nature . this be mr . lopez , who have be in solitary confinement for 18 month , and he be provide input on the type of image that he believe would make he and his fellow inmate more serene , more calm , less apt to violence .     and so what we see , I think , be that small , collective movement of change can perhaps move an entity such as our own prison system in a direction of hope . we know that tree be static entity when we look at their trunk . but if tree can create art , if they can encircle the globe seven time in one year , if prisoner can grow plant and raise frog , then perhaps there be other static entity that we hold inside ourselves , like grief , like addiction , like racism , that can also change .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   imagine , if you will — a gift . I would like for you to picture it in your mind . it be not too big — about the size of a golf ball . so envision what it look like all wrap up . but before I show you what be inside , I will tell you , it be go to do incredible thing for you . it will bring all of your family together . you will feel loved and appreciate like never before and reconnect with friend and acquaintance you have not hear from in year . adoration and admiration will overwhelm you . it will recalibrate what be most important in your life .     it will redefine your sense of spirituality and faith . you 'll have a new understanding and trust in your body . you 'll have unsurpassed vitality and energy . you 'll expand your vocabulary , meet new people , and you 'll have a healthy lifestyle . and get this — you 'll have an eight - week vacation of do absolutely nothing . you 'll eat countless gourmet meal . flower will arrive by the truckload . people will say to you , " you look great . have you have any work do ? " and you 'll have a lifetime supply of good drug .     you 'll be challenge , inspire , motivated and humble . your life will have new meaning . peace , health , serenity , happiness , nirvana . the price ? $ 55,000 , and that be an incredible deal .     by now I know you be die to know what it be and where you can get one . do amazon carry it ? do it have the apple logo on it ? be there a waiting list ? not likely . this gift come to I about five month ago . it look more like this when it be all wrap up — not quite so pretty . and this , and then this . it be a rare gem — a brain tumor , hemangioblastoma — the gift that keep on give .     and while I be okay now , I would not wish this gift for you . I be not sure you would want it . but I would not change my experience . it profoundly alter my life in way I do not expect in all the way I just share with you .     so the next time you be face with something that be unexpected , unwanted and uncertain , consider that it just may be a gift .     ( applause )  
   I want to ask you all to consider for a second the very simple fact that , by far , most of what we know about the universe come to we from light . we can stand on the earth and look up at the night sky and see star with our bare eye . the sun burn our peripheral vision . we see light reflect off the moon . and in the time since galileo point that rudimentary telescope at the celestial body , the know universe have come to we through light , across vast era in cosmic history . and with all of our modern telescope , we 've be able to collect this stunning silent movie of the universe — these series of snapshot that go all the way back to the big bang .     and yet , the universe be not a silent movie because the universe be not silent . I would like to convince you that the universe have a soundtrack and that soundtrack be play on space itself , because space can wobble like a drum . it can ring out a kind of recording throughout the universe of some of the most dramatic event as they unfold . now we would like to be able to add to a kind of glorious visual composition that we have of the universe — a sonic composition . and while we 've never hear the sound from space , we really should , in the next few year , start to turn up the volume on what be go on out there .     so in this ambition to capture song from the universe , we turn our focus to black hole and the promise they have , because black hole can bang on space - time like mallet on a drum and have a very characteristic song , which I would like to play for you — some of our prediction for what that song will be like . now black hole be dark against a dark sky . we can not see they directly . they be not bring to we with light , at least not directly . we can see they indirectly , because black hole wreak havoc on their environment . they destroy star around they . they churn up debris in their surrounding . but they will not come to we directly through light . we might one day see a shadow a black hole can cast on a very bright background , but we have not yet . and yet black hole may be hear even if they be not see , and that be because they bang on space - time like a drum .     now we owe the idea that space can ring like a drum to albert einstein — to whom we owe so much . einstein realize that if space be empty , if the universe be empty , it would be like this picture , except for maybe without the helpful grid draw on it . but if we be freely fall through the space , even without this helpful grid , we might be able to paint it ourselves , because we would notice that we travel along straight line , undeflecte straight path through the universe . einstein also realize — and this be the real meat of the matter — that if you put energy or mass in the universe , it would curve space , and a freely fall object would pass by , let us say , the sun and it would be deflect along the natural curve in the space . it be einstein 's great general theory of relativity . now even light will be bend by those path . and you can be bent so much that you be catch in orbit around the sun , as the earth be , or the moon around the earth . these be the natural curve in space .     what einstein do not realize be that , if you take our sun and you crush it down to six kilometer — so you take a million time the mass of the earth and you crush it to six kilometer across , you would make a black hole , an object so dense that if light veer too close , it would never escape — a dark shadow against the universe . it be not einstein who realize this , it be karl schwarzschild who be a german jew in world war I — join the german army already an accomplished scientist , work on the russian front . I like to imagine schwarzschild in the war in the trench calculate ballistic trajectory for cannon fire , and then , in between , calculate einstein 's equation — as you do in the trench . and he be read einstein 's recently publish general theory of relativity , and he be thrill by this theory . and he quickly surmise an exact mathematical solution that describe something very extraordinary : curve so strong that space would rain down into they , space itself would curve like a waterfall flow down the throat of a hole . and even light could not escape this current . light would be drag down the hole as everything else would be , and all that would be leave would be a shadow .     now he write to einstein , and he say , " as you will see , the war have be kind to I enough . despite the heavy gunfire , I 've be able to get away from it all and walk through the land of your idea . " and einstein be very impressed with his exact solution , and I should hope also the dedication of the scientist . this be the hardworke scientist under harsh condition . and he take schwarzschild 's idea to the prussian academy of science the next week . but einstein always think black hole be a mathematical oddity . he do not believe they exist in nature . he think nature would protect we from their formation . it be decade before the term " black hole " be coin and people realize that black hole be real astrophysical object — in fact they be the death state of very massive star that collapse catastrophically at the end of their lifetime .     now our sun will not collapse to a black hole . it be actually not massive enough . but if we do a little thought experiment — as einstein be very fond of do — we could imagine put the sun crush down to six kilometer , and put a tiny little earth around it in orbit , maybe 30 kilometer outside of the black - hole sun . and it would be self - illuminate , because now the sun 's gone , we have no other source of light — so let us make our little earth self - illuminated . and you would realize you could put the earth in a happy orbit even 30 km outside of this crushed black hole . this crushed black hole actually would fit inside manhattan , more or less . it might spill off into the hudson a little bit before it destroy the earth . but basically that be what we be talk about . we be talk about an object that you could crush down to half the square area of manhattan .     so we move this earth very close — 30 kilometer outside — and we notice it be perfectly fine orbit around the black hole . there be a sort of myth that black hole devour everything in the universe , but you actually have to get very close to fall in . but what be very impressive be that , from our vantage point , we can always see the earth . it can not hide behind the black hole . the light from the earth , some of it fall in , but some of it gets lense around and bring back to we . so you can not hide anything behind a black hole . if this be battlestar galactica and you be fight the cylon , do not hide behind the black hole . they can see you .     now , our sun will not collapse to a black hole — it be not massive enough — but there be ten of thousand of black hole in our galaxy . and if one be to eclipse the milky way , this be what it would look like . we would see a shadow of that black hole against the hundred billion star in the milky way galaxy and its luminous dust lane . and if we be to fall towards this black hole , we would see all of that light lense around it , and we could even start to cross into that shadow and really not notice that anything dramatic have happen . it would be bad if we try to fire our rocket and get out of there because we could not , anymore than light can escape .     but even though the black hole be dark from the outside , it be not dark on the inside , because all of the light from the galaxy can fall in behind we . and even though , due to a relativistic effect know as time dilation , our clock would seem to slow down relative to galactic time , it would look as though the evolution of the galaxy have be speed up and shoot at we , right before we be crush to death by the black hole . it would be like a near - death experience where you see the light at the end of the tunnel , but it be a total death experience . ( laughter ) and there be no way of tell anybody about the light at the end of the tunnel .     now we 've never see a shadow like this of a black hole , but black hole can be hear , even if they be not see . imagine now take an astrophysically realistic situation — imagine two black hole that have live a long life together . maybe they start as star and collapse to two black hole — each one 10 time the mass of the sun . so now we be go to crush they down to 60 kilometer across . they can be spin hundred of time a second . at the end of their life , they be go around each other very near the speed of light . so they be cross thousand of kilometer in a fraction of a second , and as they do so , they not only curve space , but they leave behind in their wake a ringing of space , an actual wave on space - time . space squeeze and stretch as it emanate out from these black hole bang on the universe . and they travel out into the cosmo at the speed of light .     this computer simulation be due to a relativity group at nasa goddard . it take almost 30 year for anyone in the world to crack this problem . this be one of the group . it show two black hole in orbit around each other , again , with these helpfully paint curve . and if you can see — it be kind of faint — but if you can see the red wave emanate out , those be the gravitational wave . they be literally the sound of space ringing , and they will travel out from these black hole at the speed of light as they ring down and coalesce to one spinning , quiet black hole at the end of the day . if you be stand near enough , your ear would resonate with the squeezing and stretching of space . you would literally hear the sound . now of course , your head would be squeeze and stretch unhelpfully , so you might have trouble understand what be go on . but I would like to play for you the sound that we predict .     this be from my group — a slightly less glamorous computer modeling . imagine a light black hole fall into a very heavy black hole . the sound you be hear be the light black hole bang on space each time it get close . if it get far away , it be a little too quiet . but it come in like a mallet , and it literally crack space , wobble it like a drum . and we can predict what the sound will be . we know that , as it fall in , it get fast and it get loud . and eventually , we be go to hear the little guy just fall into the big guy . ( thumping ) then it be go . now I 've never hear it that loud — it be actually more dramatic . at home it sound kind of anticlimactic . it be sort of like ding , ding , ding .     this be another sound from my group . no , I be not show you any image , because black hole do not leave behind helpful trail of ink , and space be not paint , show you the curve . but if you be to float by in space on a space holiday and you hear this , you want to get move . ( laughter ) want to get away from the sound . both black hole be move . both black hole be get close together . in this case , they be both wobble quite a lot . and then they be go to merge . ( thumping ) now it be go . now that chirp be very characteristic of black hole merge — that it chirp up at the end . now that be our prediction for what we 'll see .     luckily we be at this safe distance in long beach , california . and surely , somewhere in the universe two black hole have merge . and surely , the space around we be ring after travel maybe a million light year , or a million year , at the speed of light to get to we . but the sound be too quiet for any of we to ever hear . there be very industrious experiment be build on earth — one call ligo — which will detect deviation in the squeezing and stretching of space at less than the fraction of a nucleus of an atom over four kilometer . it be a remarkably ambitious experiment , and it be go to be at advanced sensitivity within the next few year — to pick this up . there be also a mission propose for space , which hopefully will launch in the next ten year , call lisa . and lisa will be able to see super - massive black hole — black hole million or billion of time the mass of the sun .     in this hubble image , we see two galaxy . they look like they be freeze in some embrace . and each one probably harbor a super - massive black hole at its core . but they be not frozen ; they be actually merge . these two black hole be collide , and they will merge over a billion - year time scale . it be beyond our human perception to pick up a song of that duration . but lisa could see the final stage of two super - massive black hole early in the universe 's history , the last 15 minute before they fall together . and it be not just black hole , but it be also any big disturbance in the universe — and the big of they all be the big bang . when that expression be coin , it be derisive — like , " oh , who would believe in a big bang ? " but now it actually might be more technically accurate because it might bang . it might make a sound .     this animation from my friend at proton studio show look at the big bang from the outside . we do not ever want to do that actually . we want to be inside the universe because there be no such thing as stand outside the universe . so imagine you be inside the big bang . it be everywhere , it be all around you , and the space be wobble chaotically . fourteen billion year pass and this song be still ring all around we . galaxy form , and generation of star form in those galaxy , and around one star , at least one star , be a habitable planet . and here we be frantically build these experiment , do these calculation , write these computer code .     imagine a billion year ago , two black hole collide . that song have be ring through space for all that time . we be not even here . it get close and close — 40,000 year ago , we be still do cave painting . it be like hurry , build your instrument . it be get close and close , and in 20 ... whatever year it will be when our detector be finally at advanced sensitivity — we 'll build they , we 'll turn on the machine and , bang , we 'll catch it — the first song from space . if it be the big bang we be go to pick up , it would sound like this . ( static ) it be a terrible sound . it be literally the definition of noise . it be white noise ; it be such a chaotic ringing . but it be around we everywhere , presumably , if it have not be wipe out by some other process in the universe . and if we pick it up , it will be music to our ear because it will be the quiet echo of that moment of our creation , of our observable universe .     so within the next few year , we 'll be able to turn up the soundtrack a little bit , render the universe in audio . but if we detect those early moment , it 'll bring we that much close to an understanding of the big bang , which bring we that much close to ask some of the hard , most elusive , question . if we run the movie of our universe backwards , we know that there be a big bang in our past , and we might even hear the cacophonous sound of it , but be our big bang the only big bang ? I mean we have to ask , have it happen before ? will it happen again ? I mean , in the spirit of rise to ted 's challenge to reignite wonder , we can ask question , at least for this last minute , that honestly might evade we forever .     but we have to ask : be it possible that our universe be just a plume off of some great history ? or , be it possible that we be just a branch off of a multiverse — each branch with its own big bang in its past — maybe some of they with black hole play drum , maybe some without — maybe some with sentient life , and maybe some without — not in our past , not in our future , but somehow fundamentally connect to we ? so we have to wonder , if there be a multiverse , in some other patch of that multiverse , be there creature ? here be my multiverse creature . be there other creature in the multiverse , wonder about we and wonder about their own origin ? and if they be , I can imagine they as we be , calculate , write computer code , building instrument , try to detect that faint sound of their origin and wonder who else be out there .     thank you . thank you .     ( applause )  
   if I should have a daughter , instead of " mom , " she be go to call I " point b , " because that way she know that no matter what happen , at least she can always find her way to I .     and I be go to paint solar system on the back of her hand so she have to learn the entire universe before she can say , " oh , I know that like the back of my hand . "     and she be go to learn that this life will hit you hard in the face , wait for you to get back up just so it can kick you in the stomach . but get the wind knock out of you be the only way to remind your lung how much they like the taste of air . there be hurt , here , that can not be fix by band - aid or poetry .     so the first time she realize that wonder woman be not come , I 'll make sure she know she do not have to wear the cape all by herself , because no matter how wide you stretch your finger , your hand will always be too small to catch all the pain you want to heal . believe I , I 've try . " and , baby , " I 'll tell she , do not keep your nose up in the air like that . I know that trick ; I 've do it a million time . you be just smell for smoke so you can follow the trail back to a burn house , so you can find the boy who lose everything in the fire to see if you can save he . or else find the boy who light the fire in the first place , to see if you can change he . but I know she will anyway , so instead I 'll always keep an extra supply of chocolate and rain boot nearby , because there be no heartbreak that chocolate can not fix . okay , there be a few that chocolate can not fix .     but that be what the rain boot be for , because rain will wash away everything , if you let it . I want she to look at the world through the underside of a glass - bottom boat , to look through a microscope at the galaxy that exist on the pinpoint of a human mind , because that be the way my mom teach I . that there 'll be day like this .     ( singing ) there 'll be day like this , my momma say . when you open your hand to catch and wind up with only blister and bruise ; when you step out of the phone booth and try to fly and the very people you want to save be the one stand on your cape ; when your boot will fill with rain , and you 'll be up to your knee in disappointment . and those be the very day you have all the more reason to say thank you .     because there be nothing more beautiful than the way the ocean refuse to stop kiss the shoreline , no matter how many time it be send away . you will put the wind in win some , lose some . you will put the star in start over , and over . and no matter how many land mine erupt in a minute , be sure your mind land on the beauty of this funny place call life . and yes , on a scale from one to over - trusting , I be pretty damn naive . but I want she to know that this world be make out of sugar . it can crumble so easily , but do not be afraid to stick your tongue out and taste it .     " baby , " I 'll tell she , " remember , your momma be a worrier , and your poppa be a warrior , and you be the girl with small hand and big eye who never stop ask for more . " remember that good thing come in three and so do bad thing . always apologize when you 've do something wrong , but do not you ever apologize for the way your eye refuse to stop shine . your voice be small , but do not ever stop singe . and when they finally hand you heartache , when they slip war and hatred under your door and offer you handout on street - corner of cynicism and defeat , you tell they that they really ought to meet your mother .     ( applause )     thank you . thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     thank .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     all right , so I want you to take a moment , and I want you to think of three thing that you know to be true . they can be about whatever you want — technology , entertainment , design , your family , what you have for breakfast . the only rule be do not think too hard . okay , ready ? go . okay .     so here be three thing I know to be true . I know that jean - luc godard be right when he say that , " a good story have a beginning , a middle and an end , although not necessarily in that order . " I know that I be incredibly nervous and excited to be up here , which be greatly inhibit my ability to keep it cool .     ( laughter )     and I know that I have be wait all week to tell this joke .     ( laughter )     why be the scarecrow invite to ted ? because he be out stand in his field .     ( laughter )     I be sorry . okay , so these be three thing I know to be true . but there be plenty of thing I have trouble understanding . so I write poem to figure thing out . sometimes the only way I know how to work through something be by write a poem . sometimes I get to the end of the poem , look back and go , " oh , that be what this be all about , " and sometimes I get to the end of the poem and have not solve anything , but at least I have a new poem out of it .     spoken - word poetry be the art of performance poetry . I tell people it involve create poetry that do not just want to sit on paper , that something about it demand it be hear out loud or witness in person .     when I be a freshman in high school , I be a live wire of nervous hormone . and I be underdeveloped and over - excitable . and despite my fear of ever be look at for too long , I be fascinate by the idea of spoken - word poetry . I feel that my two secret love , poetry and theater , have come together , have a baby , a baby I need to get to know . so I decide to give it a try . my first speak - word poem , pack with all the wisdom of a 14 - year - old , be about the injustice of be see as unfeminine . the poem be very indignant , and mainly exaggerated , but the only spoken - word poetry that I have see up until that point be mainly indignant , so I think that be what be expect of I .     the first time that I perform , the audience of teenager hoot and holler their sympathy , and when I come off the stage , I be shake . I feel this tap on my shoulder , and I turn around to see this giant girl in a hoodie sweatshirt emerge from the crowd . she be maybe eight foot tall and look like she could beat I up with one hand , but instead she just nod at I and say , " hey , I really feel that . thank . " and lightning strike . I be hook .     I discover this bar on manhattan 's low east side that host a weekly poetry open mic , and my bewildered , but supportive , parent take I to soak in every ounce of spoken word that I could . I be the young by at least a decade , but somehow the poet at the bowery poetry club do not seem bother by the 14 - year - old wandering about . in fact , they welcome I .     and it be here , listen to these poet share their story , that I learn that speak - word poetry do not have to be indignant , it could be fun or painful or serious or silly . the bowery poetry club become my classroom and my home , and the poet who perform encourage I to share my story as well . never mind the fact that I be 14 . they tell I , " write about be 14 . " so I do and stand amazed every week when these brilliant , grow - up poet laugh with I and groan their sympathy and clap and tell I , " hey , I really feel that too . "     now I can divide my spoken - word journey into three step . step one be the moment I say , " I can . I can do this . " and that be thank to a girl in a hoodie . step two be the moment I say , " I will . I will continue . I love spoken word . I will keep come back week after week . " and step three begin when I realize I do not have to write indignant poem , if that be not what I be . there be thing that be specific to I , and the more that I focus on those thing , the weird my poetry get , but the more that it feel like mine . it be not just the adage " write what you know . " it be about gather up all of the knowledge and experience you 've collect up to now to help you dive into the thing you do not know . I use poetry to help I work through what I do not understand , but I show up to each new poem with a backpack full of everywhere else that I 've be .     when I get to university , I meet a fellow poet who share my belief in the magic of spoken - word poetry . and actually , phil kaye and I coincidentally also share the same last name . when I be in high school I have create project v.o.i.c.e . as a way to encourage my friend to do speak word with I . but phil and I decide to reinvent project v.o.i.c.e . , this time change the mission to use spoken - word poetry as a way to entertain , educate and inspire . we stay full - time student , but in between we travel , perform and teach nine - year - old to mfa candidate , from california to indiana to india to a public high school just up the street from campus .     and we see over and over the way that spoken - word poetry crack open lock . but it turn out sometimes , poetry can be really scary . turn out sometimes , you have to trick teenager into write poetry . so I come up with list . everyone can write list . and the first list that I assign be " 10 thing I know to be true . " and here be what happen , you would discover it too if we all start share our list out loud . at a certain point , you would realize that someone have the exact same thing , or one thing very similar , to something on your list . and then someone else have something the complete opposite of your . third , someone have something you 've never even hear of before . fourth , someone have something you think you know everything about , but they be introduce a new angle of look at it . and I tell people that this be where great story start from — these four intersection of what you be passionate about and what other might be invest in .     and most people respond really well to this exercise . but one of my student , a freshman name charlotte , be not convince . charlotte be very good at writing list , but she refuse to write any poem . " miss , " she would say , " I be just not interesting . I do not have anything interesting to say . " so I assign her list after list , and one day I assign the list " 10 thing I should have learn by now . " number three on charlotte 's list be , " I should have learn not to crush on guy three time my age . " I ask she what that mean , and she say , " miss , it be kind of a long story . " and I say , " charlotte , it sound pretty interesting to I . " and so she write her first poem , a love poem unlike any I have ever hear before . and the poem begin , " anderson cooper be a gorgeous man . "     ( laughter )     " do you see he on 60 minute , race michael phelps in a pool — nothing but swim trunk on — diving in the water , determine to beat this swimming champion ? after the race , he toss his wet , cloud - white hair and say , ' you be a god . ' no , anderson , you be the god . "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     now , I know that the number one rule to be cool be to seem unfaze , to never admit that anything scare you or impress you or excite you . somebody once tell I it be like walk through life like this . you protect yourself from all the unexpected misery or hurt that might show up . but I try to walk through life like this . and yes , that mean catch all of those misery and hurt , but it also mean that when beautiful , amazing thing just fall out of the sky , I be ready to catch they . I use speak word to help my student rediscover wonder , to fight their instinct to be cool and unfazed and , instead , actively pursue be engage with what go on around they , so that they can reinterpret and create something from it .     it be not that I think that speak - word poetry be the ideal art form . I be always try to find the good way to tell each story . I write musical ; I make short film alongside my poem . but I teach spoken - word poetry because it be accessible . not everyone can read music or own a camera , but everyone can communicate in some way , and everyone have story that the rest of we can learn from . plus , spoken - word poetry allow for immediate connection . it be not uncommon to feel like you be alone or that nobody understand you , but speak word teach that if you have the ability to express yourself and the courage to present those story and opinion , you could be reward with a room full of your peer , or your community , who will listen . and maybe even a giant girl in a hoodie who will connect with what you 've share . and that be an amazing realization to have , especially when you be 14 . plus , now with youtube , that connection be not even limit to the room we be in . I be so lucky that there be this archive of performance that I can share with my student . it allow for even more opportunity for they to find a poet or a poem that they connect to .     once you 've figure this out , it be tempting to keep write the same poem , or keep tell the same story , over and over , once you 've figure out that it will gain you applause . it be not enough to just teach that you can express yourself . you have to grow and explore and take risk and challenge yourself . and that be step three : infuse the work you be do with the specific thing that make you you , even while those thing be always change . because step three never end . but you do not get to start on step three , until you take step one first : " I can . "     I travel a lot while I be teach , and I do not always get to watch all of my student reach their step three , but I be very lucky with charlotte , that I get to watch her journey unfold the way it do . I watch she realize that , by put the thing that she know to be true into the work she be do , she can create poem that only charlotte can write , about eyeball and elevator and dora the explorer . and I be try to tell story only I can tell — like this story . I spend a lot of time think about the good way to tell this story , and I wonder if the good way be go to be a powerpoint , a short film — and where exactly be the beginning , the middle or the end ? I wonder whether I would get to the end of this talk and finally have figure it all out , or not .     and I always think that my beginning be at the bowery poetry club , but it be possible that it be much early . in prepare for ted , I discover this diary page in an old journal . I think december 54th be probably suppose to be 24th . it be clear that when I be a child , I definitely walk through life like this . I think that we all do . I would like to help other rediscover that wonder — to want to engage with it , to want to learn , to want to share what they 've learn , what they 've figure out to be true and what they be still figure out .     so I would like to close with this poem .     when they bomb hiroshima , the explosion form a mini - supernova , so every live animal , human or plant that receive direct contact with the ray from that sun be instantly turn to ash . and what be leave of the city soon follow . the long - last damage of nuclear radiation cause an entire city and its population to turn into powder . when I be bear , my mom say I look around the whole hospital room with a stare that say , " this ? I 've do this before . " she say I have old eye . when my grandpa genji die , I be only five year old , but I take my mom by the hand and tell she , " do not worry , he 'll come back as a baby . " and yet , for someone who be apparently do this already , I still have not figure anything out yet . my knee still buckle every time I get on a stage . my self - confidence can be measure out in teaspoon mix into my poetry , and it still always taste funny in my mouth . but in hiroshima , some people be wipe clean away , leave only a wristwatch or a diary page . so no matter that I have inhibition to fill all my pocket , I keep try , hope that one day I 'll write a poem I can be proud to let sit in a museum exhibit as the only proof I exist . my parent name I sarah , which be a biblical name . in the original story , god tell sarah she could do something impossible , and — she laugh , because the first sarah , she do not know what to do with impossible . and I ? well , neither do I , but I see the impossible every day . impossible be try to connect in this world , try to hold onto other while thing be blow up around you , know that while you be speak , they be not just wait for their turn to talk — they hear you . they feel exactly what you feel at the same time that you feel it . it be what I strive for every time I open my mouth — that impossible connection . there be this piece of wall in hiroshima that be completely burn black by the radiation . but on the front step , a person who be sit there block the ray from hit the stone . the only thing leave now be a permanent shadow of positive light . after the a - bomb , specialist say it would take 75 year for the radiation - damage soil of hiroshima city to ever grow anything again . but that spring , there be new bud pop up from the earth . when I meet you , in that moment , I be no long a part of your future . I start quickly become part of your past . but in that instant , I get to share your present . and you , you get to share mine . and that be the great present of all . so if you tell I I can do the impossible — I 'll probably laugh at you . I do not know if I can change the world yet , because I do not know that much about it — and I do not know that much about reincarnation either , but if you make I laugh hard enough , sometimes I forget what century I be in . this be not my first time here . this be not my last time here . these be not the last word I 'll share . but just in case , I be try my hard to get it right this time around .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I just come back from a community that hold the secret to human survival . it be a place where woman run the show , have sex to say hello , and play rule the day — where fun be serious business . and no , this be not burn man or san francisco . ( laughter ) lady and gentleman , meet your cousin . this be the world of wild bonobo in the jungle of congo . bonobo be , together with chimpanzee , your live close relative . that mean we all share a common ancestor , an evolutionary grandmother , who live around six million year ago . now , chimpanzee be well - know for their aggression .     ( laughter )     but unfortunately , we have make too much of an emphasis of this aspect in our narrative of human evolution . but bonobo show we the other side of the coin . while chimpanzee be dominate by big , scary guy , bonobo society be run by empowered female . these guy have really work something out , since this lead to a highly tolerant society where fatal violence have not be observe yet . but unfortunately , bonobo be the least understand of the great ape . they live in the depth of the congolese jungle , and it have be very difficult to study they .     the congo be a paradox — a land of extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness itself — the scene of a violent conflict that have rage for decade and claim nearly as many life as the first world war . not surprisingly , this destruction also endanger bonobo survival . bushmeat trade and forest loss mean we could not fill a small stadium with all the bonobo that be leave in the world — and we be not even sure of that to be honest . yet , in this land of violence and chaos , you can hear hidden laughter sway the tree .     who be these cousin ? we know they as the " make love , not war " ape since they have frequent , promiscuous and bisexual sex to manage conflict and solve social issue . now , I be not say this be the solution to all of humanity 's problem — since there be more to bonobo life than the kama sutra . bonobo , like human , love to play throughout their entire life . play be not just child 's game . for we and they , play be foundational for bond relationship and foster tolerance . it be where we learn to trust and where we learn about the rule of the game . play increase creativity and resilience , and it be all about the generation of diversity — diversity of interaction , diversity of behavior , diversity of connection . and when you watch bonobo play , you be see the very evolutionary root of human laughter , dance and ritual . play be the glue that bind we together .     now , I do not know how you play , but I want to show you a couple of unique clip fresh from the wild . first , it be a ball game bonobo - style — and I do not mean football . so here , we have a young female and a male engage in a chase game . have a look what she be do . it might be the evolutionary origin of the phrase , " she be get he by the ball . " ( laughter ) only I think that he be rather love it here , right ? yeah . ( laughter ) so sex play be common in both bonobo and human . and this video be really interesting because it show — this video 's really interesting because it show the inventiveness of bring unusual element into play — such as testicle — and also how play both require trust and foster trust — while at the same time be tremendous fun .     but play be a shapeshifter . ( laughter ) play be a shapeshifter , and it can take many form , some of which be more quiet , imaginative , curious — maybe where wonder be discover anew . and I want you to see , this be fuku , a young female , and she be quietly play with water . I think , like she , we sometimes play alone , and we explore the boundary of our inner and our outer world . and it be that playful curiosity that drive we to explore , drive we to interact , and then the unexpected connection we form be the real hotbe for creativity .     so these be just small taster into the insight that bonobo give we to our past and present . but they also hold a secret for our future , a future where we need to adapt to an increasingly challenging world through great creativity and great cooperation . the secret be that play be the key to these capacity . in other word , play be our adaptive wildcard . in order to adapt successfully to a change world , we need to play . but will we make the most of our playfulness ? play be not frivolous . play 's essential . for bonobo and human alike , life be not just red in tooth and claw . in time when it seem least appropriate to play , it might be the time when it be most urgent .     and so , my fellow primate , let we embrace this gift from evolution and play together , as we rediscover creativity , fellowship and wonder .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be a huge believer in hand - on education . but you have to have the right tool . if I be go to teach my daughter about electronic , I be not go to give she a soldering iron . and similarly , she find prototyping board really frustrating for her little hand . so my wonderful student sam and I decide to look at the most tangible thing we could think of : play - doh . and so we spend a summer look at different play - doh recipe . and these recipe probably look really familiar to any of you who have make homemade play - dough — pretty standard ingredient you probably have in your kitchen . we have two favorite recipe — one that have these ingredient and a second that have sugar instead of salt . and they be great . we can make great little sculpture with these .     but the really cool thing about they be when we put they together . you see that really salty play - doh ? well , it conduct electricity . and this be nothing new . it turn out that regular play - doh that you buy at the store conduct electricity , and high school physics teacher have use that for year . but our homemade play - dough actually have half the resistance of commercial play - doh . and that sugar dough ? well it be 150 time more resistant to electric current than that salt dough . so what do that mean ? well it mean if you they together you suddenly have circuit — circuit that the most creative , tiny , little hand can build on their own .     ( applause )     and so I want to do a little demo for you . so if I take this salt dough , again , it be like the play - dough you probably make as kid , and I plug it in — it be a two - lead battery pack , simple battery pack , you can buy they at radio shack and pretty much anywhere else — we can actually then light thing up . but if any of you have study electrical engineering , we can also create a short circuit . if I push these together , the light turn off . right , the current want to run through the play - dough , not through that lead . if I separate they again , I have some light . well now if I take that sugar dough , the sugar dough do not want to conduct electricity . it be like a wall to the electricity . if I place that between , now all the dough be touching , but if I stick that light back in , I have light . in fact , I could even add some movement to my sculpture . if I want a spin tail , let us grab a motor , put some play - dough on it , stick it on and we have spin .     ( applause )     and once you have the basic , we can make a slightly more complicated circuit . we call this our sushi circuit . it be very popular with kid . I plug in again the power to it . and now I can start talk about parallel and series circuit . I can start plug in lot of light . and we can start talk about thing like electrical load . what happen if I put in lot of light and then add a motor ? it 'll dim . we can even add microprocessor and have this as an input and create squishy sound music that we 've do . you could do parallel and series circuit for kid use this .     so this be all in your home kitchen . we 've actually try to turn it into an electrical engineering lab . we have a website , it be all there . these be the home recipe . we 've get some video . you can make they yourself . and it be be really fun since we put they up to see where these have go . we 've have a mom in utah who use they with her kid , to a science researcher in the u.k . , and curriculum developer in hawaii .     so I would encourage you all to grab some play - doh , grab some salt , grab some sugar and start play . we do not usually think of our kitchen as an electrical engineering lab or little kid as circuit designer , but maybe we should .     have fun . thank you .     ( applause )  
   so it be 1995 , I be in college , and a friend and I go on a road trip from providence , rhode island to portland , oregon . and you know , we be young and unemployed , so we do the whole thing on back road through state park and national forest — basically the long route we can possibly take . and somewhere in the middle of south dakota , I turn to my friend and I ask she a question that be be bother I for 2,000 mile . " what be up with the chinese character I keep see by the side of the road ? " my friend look at I totally blankly . there be actually a gentleman in the front row who be do a perfect imitation of her look . ( laughter ) and I be like , " you know , all the sign we keep see with the chinese character on they . " she just stare at I for a few moment , and then she crack up , because she figure out what I be talk about . and what I be talk about be this . ( laughter ) right , the famous chinese character for picnic area .     ( laughter )     I 've spend the last five year of my life think about situation exactly like this — why we sometimes misunderstand the sign around we , and how we behave when that happen , and what all of this can tell we about human nature . in other word , as you hear chris say , I 've spend the last five year think about be wrong . this might strike you as a strange career move , but it actually have one great advantage : no job competition . ( laughter ) in fact , most of we do everything we can to avoid think about be wrong , or at least to avoid think about the possibility that we ourselves be wrong . we get it in the abstract . we all know everybody in this room make mistake . the human specie , in general , be fallible — okay fine .     but when it come down to I , right now , to all the belief I hold , here in the present tense , you all of this abstract appreciation of fallibility go out the window — and I can not actually think of anything I be wrong about . and the thing be , the present tense be where we live . we go to meeting in the present tense ; we go on family vacation in the present tense ; we go to the poll and vote in the present tense . so effectively , we all kind of wind up travel through life , trap in this little bubble of feel very right about everything .     I think this be a problem . I think it be a problem for each of we as individual , in our personal and professional life , and I think it be a problem for all of we collectively as a culture . so what I want to do today be , first of all , talk about why we get stick inside this feeling of be right . and second , why it be such a problem . and finally , I want to convince you that it be possible to step outside of that feeling and that if you can do so , it be the single great moral , intellectual and creative leap you can make .     so why do we get stick in this feeling of be right ? one reason , actually , have to do with a feeling of be wrong . so let I ask you guy something — or actually , let I ask you guy something , because you be right here : how do it feel — emotionally — how do it feel to be wrong ? dreadful . thumb down . embarrassing . okay , wonderful , great . dreadful , thumb down , embarrassing — thank you , these be great answer , but they be answer to a different question . you guy be answer the question : how do it feel to realize you be wrong ? ( laughter ) realize you be wrong can feel like all of that and a lot of other thing , right ? I mean it can be devastating , it can be revelatory , it can actually be quite funny , like my stupid chinese character mistake . but just be wrong do not feel like anything .     I 'll give you an analogy . do you remember that loony tune cartoon where there be this pathetic coyote who be always chase and never catch a roadrunner ? in pretty much every episode of this cartoon , there be a moment where the coyote be chase the roadrunner and the roadrunner run off a cliff , which be fine — he be a bird , he can fly . but the thing be , the coyote run off the cliff right after he . and what be funny — at least if you be six year old — be that the coyote 's totally fine too . he just keep run — right up until the moment that he look down and realize that he be in mid - air . that be when he fall . when we be wrong about something — not when we realize it , but before that — we be like that coyote after he be go off the cliff and before he look down . you know , we be already wrong , we be already in trouble , but we feel like we be on solid ground . so I should actually correct something I say a moment ago . it do feel like something to be wrong ; it feel like be right .     ( laughter )     so this be one reason , a structural reason , why we get stick inside this feeling of rightness . I call this error blindness . most of the time , we do not have any kind of internal cue to let we know that we be wrong about something , until it be too late . but there be a second reason that we get stick inside this feeling as well — and this one be cultural . think back for a moment to elementary school . you be sit there in class , and your teacher be hand back quiz paper , and one of they look like this . this be not mine , by the way . ( laughter ) so there you be in grade school , and you know exactly what to think about the kid who get this paper . it be the dumb kid , the troublemaker , the one who never do his homework . so by the time you be nine year old , you 've already learn , first of all , that people who get stuff wrong be lazy , irresponsible dimwit — and second of all , that the way to succeed in life be to never make any mistake .     we learn these really bad lesson really well . and a lot of we — and I suspect , especially a lot of we in this room — deal with they by just become perfect little a student , perfectionist , over - achiever . right , mr . cfo , astrophysicist , ultra - marathoner ? ( laughter ) you be all cfo , astrophysicist , ultra - marathoner , it turn out . okay , so fine . except that then we freak out at the possibility that we 've get something wrong . because accord to this , get something wrong mean there be something wrong with we . so we just insist that we be right , because it make we feel smart and responsible and virtuous and safe .     so let I tell you a story . a couple of year ago , a woman come into beth israel deaconess medical center for a surgery . beth israel 's in boston . it be the teaching hospital for harvard — one of the good hospital in the country . so this woman come in and she be take into the operating room . she be anesthetize , the surgeon do his thing — stitch she back up , send she out to the recovery room . everything seem to have go fine . and she wake up , and she look down at herself , and she say , " why be the wrong side of my body in bandage ? " well the wrong side of her body be in bandage because the surgeon have perform a major operation on her left leg instead of she right one . when the vice president for health care quality at beth israel speak about this incident , he say something very interesting . he say , " for whatever reason , the surgeon simply feel that he be on the correct side of the patient . " ( laughter ) the point of this story be that trust too much in the feeling of be on the correct side of anything can be very dangerous .     this internal sense of rightness that we all experience so often be not a reliable guide to what be actually go on in the external world . and when we act like it be , and we stop entertain the possibility that we could be wrong , well that be when we end up do thing like dump 200 million gallon of oil into the gulf of mexico , or torpedo the global economy . so this be a huge practical problem . but it be also a huge social problem .     think for a moment about what it mean to feel right . it mean that you think that your belief just perfectly reflect reality . and when you feel that way , you 've get a problem to solve , which be , how be you go to explain all of those people who disagree with you ? it turn out , most of we explain those people the same way , by resort to a series of unfortunate assumption . the first thing we usually do when someone disagree with we be we just assume they be ignorant . they do not have access to the same information that we do , and when we generously share that information with they , they be go to see the light and come on over to our team . when that do not work , when it turn out those people have all the same fact that we do and they still disagree with we , then we move on to a second assumption , which be that they be idiot . ( laughter ) they have all the right piece of the puzzle , and they be too moronic to put they together correctly . and when that do not work , when it turn out that people who disagree with we have all the same fact we do and be actually pretty smart , then we move on to a third assumption : they know the truth , and they be deliberately distort it for their own malevolent purpose . so this be a catastrophe .     this attachment to our own rightness keep we from prevent mistake when we absolutely need to and cause we to treat each other terribly . but to I , what be most baffling and most tragic about this be that it miss the whole point of be human . it be like we want to imagine that our mind be just these perfectly translucent window and we just gaze out of they and describe the world as it unfold . and we want everybody else to gaze out of the same window and see the exact same thing . that be not true , and if it be , life would be incredibly boring . the miracle of your mind be not that you can see the world as it be . it be that you can see the world as it be not . we can remember the past , and we can think about the future , and we can imagine what it be like to be some other person in some other place . and we all do this a little differently , which be why we can all look up at the same night sky and see this and also this and also this . and yeah , it be also why we get thing wrong .     1,200 year before descarte say his famous thing about " I think therefore I be , " this guy , st . augustine , sit down and write " fallor ergo sum " — " I err therefore I be . " augustine understand that our capacity to screw up , it be not some kind of embarrassing defect in the human system , something we can eradicate or overcome . it be totally fundamental to who we be . because , unlike god , we do not really know what be go on out there . and unlike all of the other animal , we be obsess with try to figure it out . to I , this obsession be the source and root of all of our productivity and creativity .     last year , for various reason , I find myself listen to a lot of episode of the public radio show this american life . and so I be listen and I be listen , and at some point , I start feel like all the story be about be wrong . and my first thought be , " I 've lose it . I 've become the crazy wrongness lady . I just imagine it everywhere , " which have happen . but a couple of month later , I actually have a chance to interview ira glass , who be the host of the show . and I mention this to he , and he be like , " no actually , that be true . in fact , " he say , " as a staff , we joke that every single episode of our show have the same crypto - theme . and the crypto - theme be : ' I think this one thing be go to happen and something else happen instead . ' and the thing be , " say ira glass , " we need this . we need these moment of surprise and reversal and wrongness to make these story work . " and for the rest of we , audience member , as listener , as reader , we eat this stuff up . we love thing like plot twist and red herring and surprise ending . when it come to our story , we love be wrong .     but , you know , our story be like this because our life be like this . we think this one thing be go to happen and something else happen instead . george bush think he be go to invade iraq , find a bunch of weapon of mass destruction , liberate the people and bring democracy to the middle east . and something else happen instead . and hosni mubarak think he be go to be the dictator of egypt for the rest of his life , until he get too old or too sick and could pass the reign of power onto his son . and something else happen instead . and maybe you think you be go to grow up and marry your high school sweetheart and move back to your hometown and raise a bunch of kid together . and something else happen instead . and I have to tell you that I think I be write an incredibly nerdy book about a subject everybody hate for an audience that would never materialize . and something else happen instead .     ( laughter )     I mean , this be life . for good and for ill , we generate these incredible story about the world around we , and then the world turn around and astonish we . no offense , but this entire conference be an unbelievable monument to our capacity to get stuff wrong . we just spend an entire week talk about innovation and advancement and improvement , but you know why we need all of those innovation and advancement and improvement ? because half the stuff that be the most mind - boggling and world - alter — ted 1998 — eh . ( laughter ) do not really work out that way , do it ? ( laughter ) where be my jet pack , chris ?     ( laughter )     ( applause )     so here we be again . and that be how it go . we come up with another idea . we tell another story . we hold another conference . the theme of this one , as you guy have now hear seven million time , be the rediscovery of wonder . and to I , if you really want to rediscover wonder , you need to step outside of that tiny , terrified space of rightness and look around at each other and look out at the vastness and complexity and mystery of the universe and be able to say , " wow , I do not know . maybe I be wrong . "     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you guy .     ( applause )  
   so as a fashion designer , I 've always tend to think of material something like this , or this , or maybe this . but then I meet a biologist , and now I think of material like this — green tea , sugar , a few microbe and a little time . I be essentially use a kombucha recipe , which be a symbiotic mix of bacteria , yeast and other micro - organism , which spin cellulose in a fermentation process . over time , these tiny thread form in the liquid into layer and produce a mat on the surface .     so we start by brew the tea . I brew up to about 30 liter of tea at a time , and then while it be still hot , add a couple of kilo of sugar . we stir this in until it be completely dissolve and then pour it into a growth bath . we need to check that the temperature have cool to below 30 degree c. and then we be ready to add the live organism . and along with that , some acetic acid . and once you get this process go , you can actually recycle your previous fermented liquid . we need to maintain an optimum temperature for the growth . and I use a heat mat to sit the bath on and a thermostat to regulate it . and actually , in hot weather , I can just grow it outside . so this be my mini fabric farm .     after about three day , the bubble will appear on the surface of the liquid . so this be tell we that the fermentation be in full swing . and the bacteria be feed on the sugar nutrient in the liquid . so they be spin these tiny nano fiber of pure cellulose . and they be stick together , form layer and give we a sheet on the surface . after about two to three week , we be look at something which be about an inch in thickness . so the bath on the left be after five day , and on the right , after 10 . and this be a static culture . you do not have to do anything to it ; you just literally watch it grow . it do not need light .     and when it be ready to harvest , you take it out of the bath and you wash it in cold , soapy water . at this point , it be really heavy . it be over 90 percent water , so we need to let that evaporate . so I spread it out onto a wooden sheet . again , you can do that outside and just let it dry in the air . and as it be dry , it be compress , so what you be leave with , depend on the recipe , be something that be either like a really light - weight , transparent paper , or something which be much more like a flexible vegetable leather . and then you can either cut that out and sew it conventionally , or you can use the wet material to form it around a three - dimensional shape . and as it evaporate , it will knit itself together , form seam .     so the color in this jacket be come purely from green tea . I guess it also look a little bit like human skin , which intrigue I . since it be organic , I be really keen to try and minimize the addition of any chemical . I can make it change color without use dye by a process of iron oxidation . use fruit and vegetable staining , create organic patterning . and use indigo , make it anti - microbial . and in fact , cotton would take up to 18 dip in indigo to achieve a color this dark . and because of the super - absorbency of this kind of cellulose , it just take one , and a really short one at that .     what I can not yet do be make it water - resistant . so if I be to walk outside in the rain wear this dress today , I would immediately start to absorb huge amount of water . the dress would get really heavy , and eventually the seam would probably fall apart — leave I feel rather naked . possibly a good performance piece , but definitely not ideal for everyday wear . what I be look for be a way to give the material the quality that I need . so what I want to do be say to a future bug , " spin I a thread . align it in this direction . make it hydrophobic . and while you be at it , just form it around this 3d shape . "     bacterial cellulose be actually already be use for wound healing , and possibly in the future for biocompatible blood vessel , possibly even replacement bone tissue . but with synthetic biology , we can actually imagine engineer this bacterium to produce something that give we the quality , quantity and shape of material that we desire . obviously , as a designer , that be really exciting because then I start to think , wow , we could actually imagine grow consumable product .     what excite I about use microbe be their efficiency . so we only grow what we need . there be no waste . and in fact , we could make it from a waste stream — so for example , a waste sugar stream from a food processing plant . finally , at the end of use , we could biodegrade it naturally along with your vegetable peeling . what I be not suggest be that microbial cellulose be go to be a replacement for cotton , leather or other textile material . but I do think it could be quite a smart and sustainable addition to our increasingly precious natural resource .     ultimately , maybe it will not even be fashion where we see these microbe have their impact . we could , for example , imagine grow a lamp , a chair , a car or maybe even a house . so I guess what my question to you be : in the future , what would you choose to grow ? thank you very much .     ( applause ) bruno giussani : suzanne , just a curiosity , what you be wear be not random . ( suzanne lee : no . ) this be one of the jacket you grow ?     sl : yes , it be . it be probably — part of the project 's still in process because this one be actually biodegrade in front of your eye . ( laughter ) it be absorb my sweat , and it be feed on it .     bg : okay , so we 'll let you go and save it , and rescue it . suzanne lee . ( sl : thank you . )     ( applause )  
   so I want to take you on a trip to an alien world . and it be not a trip that require light - year of travel , but it be to a place where it be define by light .     so it be a little - appreciate fact that most of the animal in our ocean make light . I 've spend most of my career study this phenomenon call bioluminescence . I study it because I think understand it be critical to understand life in the ocean where most bioluminescence occur . I also use it as a tool for visualize and track pollution . but mostly I be entrance by it . since my my first dive in a deep - diving submersible , when I go down and turn out the light and see the firework display , I 've be a bioluminescence junky . but I would come back from those dive and try to share the experience with word , and they be totally inadequate to the task . I need some way to share the experience directly . and the first time I figure out that way be in this little single - person submersible call deep rover .     this next video clip , you be go to see how we stimulate the bioluminescence . and the first thing you be go to see be a transect screen that be about a meter across .     ( video ) narrator : in front of the sub , a mess screen will come into contact with the soft - bodied creature of the deep sea . with the sub 's light switch off , it be possible to see their bioluminescence — the light produce when they collide with the mesh . this be the first time it have ever be record .     edith widder : so I record that with an intensify video camera that have about the sensitivity of the fully dark - adapt human eye . which mean that really be what you would see if you take a dive in a submersible . but just to try to prove that fact to you , I 've bring along some bioluminescent plankton in what be undoubtedly a foolhardy attempt at a live demonstration .     ( laughter )     so , if we could have the light down and have it as dark in here as possible , I have a flask that have bioluminescent plankton in it . and you 'll note there be no light come from they right now , either because they be dead — ( laughter ) or because I need to stir they up in some way for you to see what bioluminescence really look like .     ( gasps )     oop . sorry .     ( laughter )     I spend most of my time work in the dark ; I be use to that . okay .     so that light be make by a bioluminescent dinoflagellate , a single - celle alga . so why would a single - celle alga need to be able to produce light ? well , it use it to defend itself from its predator . the flash be like a scream for help . it be what be know as a bioluminescent burglar alarm , and just like the alarm on your car or your house , it be mean to cast unwanted attention onto the intruder , thereby either lead to his capture or scare he away .     there be a lot of animal that use this trick , for example this black dragonfish . it be get a light organ under its eye . it be get a chin barbel . it be get a lot of other light organ you can not see , but you 'll see in here in a minute . so we have to chase this in the submersible for quite sometime , because the top speed of this fish be one knot , which be the top speed of the submersible . but it be worth it , because we catch it in a special capture device , bring it up into the lab on the ship , and then everything on this fish light up . it be unbelievable . the light organ under the eye be flash . that chin barbel be flash . it be get light organ on its belly that be flash , fin light . it be a scream for help ; it be mean to attract attention . it be phenomenal . and you normally do not get to see this because we 've exhaust the luminescence when we bring they up in net .     there be other way you can defend yourself with light . for example , this shrimp release its bioluminescent chemical into the water just the way a squid or an octopus would release an ink cloud . this blind or distract the predator . this little squid be call the fire shooter because of its ability to do this . now it may look like a tasty morsel , or a pig 's head with wing — ( laughter ) but if it be attack , it put out a barrage of light — in fact , a barrage of photon torpedo . I just barely get the light out in time for you to be able to see those gob of light hit the transect screen and then just glow . it be phenomenal .     so there be a lot of animal in the open ocean — most of they that make light . and we have a pretty good idea , for most of they , why . they use it for find food , for attract mate , for defend against predator . but when you get down to the bottom of the ocean , that be where thing get really strange . and some of these animal be probably inspiration for the thing you see in " avatar , " but you do not have to travel to pandora to see they . they be thing like this .     this be a golden coral , a bush . it grow very slowly . in fact , it be think that some of these be as much as 3,000 year old , which be one reason that bottom trawling should not be allow . the other reason be this amazing bush glow . so if you brush up against it , any place you brush against it , you get this twinkle blue - green light that be just breathtaking . and you see thing like this . this look like something out of a dr . seuss book — just all manner of creature all over this thing . and these be flytrap anemone . now if you poke it , it pull in its tentacle . but if you keep poke it , it start to produce light . and it actually end up look like a galaxy . it produce these string of light , presumably as some form of defense .     there be starfish that can make light . and there be brittle star that produce band of light that dance along their arm . this look like a plant , but it be actually an animal . and it anchor itself in the sand by blow up a balloon on the end of its stock . so it can actually hold itself in very strong current , as you see here . but if we collect it very gently , and we bring it up into the lab and just squeeze it at the base of the stock , it produce this light that propagate from stem to the plume , change color as it go , from green to blue . colorization and sound effect add for you view pleasure . ( laughter ) but we have no idea why it do that .     here be another one . this be also a sea pen . it be get a brittle star hitch a ride . it be a green saber of light . and like the one you just see , it can produce these as band of light . so if I squeeze the base , the band go from base to tip . if I squeeze the tip , they go from tip to base . so what do you think happen if you squeeze it in the middle ? ( gasp ) I would be very interested in your theory about what that be about .     ( laughter )     so there be a language of light in the deep ocean , and we be just begin to understand it , and one way we be go about that be we be imitate a lot of these display . this be an optical lure that I 've use . we call it the electronic jellyfish . it be just 16 blue led that we can program to do different type of display . and we view it with a camera system I develop call eye - in - the - sea that use far red light that be invisible to most animal , so it be unobtrusive . so I just want to show you some of the response we 've elicit from animal in the deep sea .     so the camera 's black and white . it be not high - resolution . and what you be see here be a bait box with a bunch of — like the cockroach of the ocean — there be isopod all over it . and right in the front be the electronic jellyfish . and when it start flash , it be just go to be one of the led that be flash very fast . but as soon as it start to flash — and it be go to look big , because it bloom on the camera — I want you to look right here . there be something small there that respond . we be talk to something . it look like a little of string pearl basically — in fact , three string of pearl . and this be very consistent . this be in the bahama at about 2,000 foot . we basically have a chat room go on here , because once it gets start , everybody be talk . and I think this be actually a shrimp that be release its bioluminescent chemical into the water . but the cool thing be , we be talk to it . we do not know what we be say . personally , I think it be something sexy .     ( laughter )     and then finally , I want to show you some response that we record with the world 's first deep - sea webcam , which we have instal in monterey canyon last year . we 've only just begin to you all of this datum . this be go to be a glow source first , which be like bioluminescent bacteria . and it be an optical cue that there be carrion on the bottom of the ocean . so this scavenger come in , which be a giant sixgill shark . and I can not claim for sure that the optical source bring it in , because there be bait right there . but if it have be follow the odor plume , it would have come in from the other direction . and it do actually seem to be try to eat the electronic jellyfish . that be a 12 - foot - long giant sixgill shark .     okay , so this next one be from the webcam , and it be go to be this pinwheel display . and this be a burglar alarm . and that be a humboldt squid , a juvenile humboldt squid , about three foot long . this be at 3,000 foot in monterey canyon . but if it be a burglar alarm , you would not expect it to attack the jellyfish directly . it be suppose to be attack what be attack the jellyfish . but we do see a bunch of response like this . this guy be a little more contemplative . " hey , wait a minute . there be suppose to be something else there . " he be think about it . but he be persistent . he keep come back . and then he go away for a few second to think about it some more , and think , " maybe if I come in from a different angle . " ( laughter ) nope .     so we be start to get a handle on this , but only just the beginning . we need more eye on the process . so if any of you ever get a chance to take a dive in a submersible , you all mean , climb in and take the plunge . this be something that should be on everybody 's bucket list , because we live on an ocean planet . more than 90 percent , 99 percent , of the living space on our planet be ocean . it be a magical place fill with breathtaking light show and bizarre and wondrous creature , alien life form that you do not have to travel to another planet to see .     but if you do take the plunge , please remember to turn out the light . but I warn you , it be addictive .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   this story be about take imagination seriously . fourteen year ago , I first encounter this ordinary material , fishnet , use the same way for century . today , I be use it to create permanent , billowing , voluptuous form the scale of hard - edge building in city around the world . I be an unlikely person to be do this . I never study sculpture , engineering or architecture . in fact , after college I apply to seven art school and be reject you all seven .     I go off on my own to become an artist , and I paint for 10 year , when I be offer a fulbright to india . promise to give exhibition of painting , I ship my paint and arrive in mahabalipuram . the deadline for the show arrive — my paint do not . I have to do something . this fishing village be famous for sculpture . so I try bronze casting . but to make large form be too heavy and expensive . I go for a walk on the beach , watch the fisherman bundle their net into mound on the sand . I would see it every day , but this time I see it differently — a new approach to sculpture , a way to make volumetric form without heavy solid material .     my first satisfy sculpture be make in collaboration with these fisherman . it be a self - portrait title " wide hip . " ( laughter ) we hoist they on pole to photograph . I discover their soft surface reveal every ripple of wind in constantly change pattern . I be mesmerize . I continue study craft tradition and collaborate with artisan , next in lithuania with lace maker . I like the fine detail it give my work , but I want to make they large — to shift from be an object you look at to something you could get lose in .     return to india to work with those fisherman , we make a net of a million and a half hand - tie knot — instal briefly in madrid . thousand of people see it , and one of they be the urbanist manual sola - morale who be redesign the waterfront in porto , portugal . he ask if I could build this as a permanent piece for the city . I do not know if I could do that and preserve my art . durable , engineer , permanent — those be in opposition to idiosyncratic , delicate and ephemeral .     for two year , I search for a fiber that could survive ultraviolet ray , salt , air , pollution , and at the same time remain soft enough to move fluidly in the wind . we need something to hold the net up out there in the middle of the traffic circle . so we raise this 45,000 - pound steel ring . we have to engineer it to move gracefully in an average breeze and survive in hurricane wind . but there be no engineering software to model something porous and move . I find a brilliant aeronautical engineer who design sail for america 's cup racing yacht name peter heppel . he help I tackle the twin challenge of precise shape and gentle movement .     I could not build this the way I know because hand - tie knot be not go to withstand a hurricane . so I develop a relationship with an industrial fishnet factory , learn the variable of their machine , and figure out a way to make lace with they . there be no language to translate this ancient , idiosyncratic handcraft into something machine operator could produce . so we have to create one . three year and two child later , we raise this 50,000 - square - foot lace net . it be hard to believe that what I have imagine be now build , permanent and have lose nothing in translation .     ( applause )     this intersection have be bland and anonymous . now it have a sense of place . I walk underneath it for the first time . as I watch the wind 's choreography unfold , I feel sheltered and , at the same time , connect to limitless sky . my life be not go to be the same . I want to create these oasis of sculpture in space of city around the world . I be go to share two direction that be new in my work .     historic philadelphia city hall : its plaza , I feel , need a material for sculpture that be light than net . so we experiment with tiny atomize water particle to create a dry mist that be shape by the wind and in testing , discover that it can be shape by people who can interact and move through it without get wet . I be use this sculpture material to trace the path of subway train above ground in real time — like an x - ray of the city 's circulatory system unfolding .     next challenge , the biennial of the america in denver ask , could I represent the 35 nation of the western hemisphere and their interconnectedness in a sculpture ? ( laughter ) I do not know where to begin , but I say yes . I read about the recent earthquake in chile and the tsunami that ripple across the entire pacific ocean . it shift the earth 's tectonic plate , speed up the planet 's rotation and literally shorten the length of the day . so I contact noaa , and I ask if they would share their datum on the tsunami , and translate it into this . its title : " 1.26 " refer to the number of microsecond that the earth 's day be shorten .     I could not build this with a steel ring , the way I know . its shape be too complex now . so I replace the metal armature with a soft , fine mesh of a fiber 15 time strong than steel . the sculpture could now be entirely soft , which make it so light it could tie in to exist building — literally become part of the fabric of the city . there be no software that could extrude these complex net form and model they with gravity . so we have to create it .     then I get a call from new york city ask if I could adapt these concept to time square or the high line . this new soft structural method enable I to model these and build these sculpture at the scale of skyscraper . they do not have funding yet , but I dream now of bring these to city around the world where they be most need .     fourteen year ago , I search for beauty in the traditional thing , in craft form . now I combine they with hi - tech material and engineering to create voluptuous , billow form the scale of building . my artistic horizon continue to grow .     I 'll leave you with this story . I get a call from a friend in phoenix . an attorney in the office who would never be interested in art , never visit the local art museum , drag everyone she could from the building and get they outside to lie down underneath the sculpture . there they be in their business suit , lay in the grass , notice the change pattern of wind beside people they do not know , share the rediscovery of wonder .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you .     ( applause )  
   as an artist , connection be very important to I . through my work I be try to articulate that human be not separate from nature and that everything be interconnect . I first go to antarctica almost 10 year ago , where I see my first icebergs . I be in awe . my heart beat fast , my head be dizzy , try to comprehend what it be that stand in front of I . the icebergs around I be almost 200 foot out of the water , and I could only help but wonder that this be one snowflake on top of another snowflake , year after year .     icebergs be bear when they calve off of glacier or break off of ice shelf . each iceberg have its own individual personality . they have a distinct way of interact with their environment and their experience . some refuse to give up and hold on to the bitter end , while other can not take it anymore and crumble in a fit of dramatic passion .     it be easy to think , when you look at an iceberg , that they be isolate , that they be separate and alone , much like we as human sometimes view ourselves . but the reality be far from it . as an iceberg melt , I be breathe in its ancient atmosphere . as the iceberg melt , it be release mineral - rich fresh water that nourish many form of life .     I approach photograph these icebergs as if I be make portrait of my ancestor , know that in these individual moment they exist in that way and will never exist that way again . it be not a death when they melt ; it be not an end , but a continuation of their path through the cycle of life . some of the ice in the icebergs that I photograph be very young — a couple thousand year old . and some of the ice be over 100,000 year old .     the last picture I would like to show you be of an iceberg that I photograph in qeqetarsuaq , greenland . it be a very rare occasion that you get to actually witness an iceberg rolling . so here it be . you can see on the left side a small boat . that be about a 15 - foot boat . and I would like you to pay attention to the shape of the iceberg and where it be at the waterline . you can see here , it begin to roll , and the boat have move to the other side , and the man be stand there . this be an average - size greenlandic iceberg . it be about 120 foot above the water , or 40 meter . and this video be real time .     ( music )     and just like that , the iceberg show you a different side of its personality .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   ( music )     ( applause )     thank you .     imagine a solo cello concert , one would most likely think of johann sebastian bach unaccompanied cello suite . as a child study these eternal masterpiece , bach 's music would intermingle with the singe voice of muslim prayer from the neighboring arab village of the northern kibbutz in israel where I grow up . late at night , after hour of practicing , I would listen to janis joplin and billie holiday as the sound of tango music would be creep from my parent ' stereo . it all become music to I . I do not hear the boundary .     I still start every day practice play bach . his music never cease to sound fresh and surprising to I . but as I be move away from the traditional classical repertoire and try to find new way of musical expression , I realize that with today 's technological resource , there be no reason to limit what can be produce at one time from a single string instrument .     the power and coherency that come from one person hearing , perceive and you all the voice make a very different experience . the excitement of a great orchestra performance come from the attempt to have a collective of musician produce one unify whole concept . the excitement from use multi - tracking , the way I do in the piece you will hear next , come from the attempt to build and create a whole universe with many diverse layer , all generate from a single source . my cello and my voice be layer to create this large sonic canvas .     when composer write music for I , I ask they to forget what they know about the cello . I hope to arrive at new territory to discover sound I have never hear before . I want to create endless possibility with this cello . I become the medium through which the music be be channel , and in the process , when all be right , the music be transform and so be i.     ( music )     ( applause )  
   good morning everybody .     I work with really amazing , little , itty - bitty creature call cell . and let I tell you what it be like to grow these cell in the lab . I work in a lab where we take cell out of their native environment . we plate they into dish that we sometimes call petri dish . and we feed they — sterilely of course — with what we call cell culture medium — which be like their food — and we grow they in incubator .     why do I do this ? we observe the cell in a plate , and they be just on the surface . but what we be really try to do in my lab be to engineer tissue out of they . what do that even mean ? well it mean grow an actual heart , let us say , or grow a piece of bone that can be put into the body . not only that , but they can also be use for disease model . and for this purpose , traditional cell culture technique just really be not enough . the cell be kind of homesick ; the dish do not feel like their home . and so we need to do well at copy their natural environment to get they to thrive . we call this the biomimetic paradigm — copy nature in the lab .     let us take the example of the heart , the topic of a lot of my research . what make the heart unique ? well , the heart beat , rhythmically , tirelessly , faithfully . we copy this in the lab by outfit cell culture system with electrode . these electrode act like mini pacemaker to get the cell to contract in the lab . what else do we know about the heart ? well , heart cell be pretty greedy . nature feed the heart cell in your body with a very , very dense blood supply . in the lab , we micro - pattern channel in the biomaterial on which we grow the cell , and this allow we to flow the cell culture medium , the cell ' food , through the scaffold where we be grow the cell — a lot like what you might expect from a capillary bed in the heart .     so this bring I to lesson number one : life can do a lot with very little . let us take the example of electrical stimulation . let us see how powerful just one of these essential can be . on the left , we see a tiny piece of beat heart tissue that I engineer from rat cell in the lab . it be about the size of a mini marshmallow . and after one week , it be beat . you can see it in the upper left - hand corner . but do not worry if you can not see it so well . it be amazing that these cell beat at all . but what be really amazing be that the cell , when we electrically stimulate they , like with a pacemaker , that they beat so much more .     but that bring I to lesson number two : cell do all the work . in a sense , tissue engineer have a bit of an identity crisis here , because structural engineer build bridge and big thing , computer engineer , computer , but what we be do be actually build enable technology for the cell themselves . what do this mean for we ? let us do something really simple . let us remind ourselves that cell be not an abstract concept . let us remember that our cell sustain our life in a very real way . " we be what we eat , " could easily be describe as , " we be what our cell eat . " and in the case of the flora in our gut , these cell may not even be human . but it be also worth note that cell also mediate our experience of life . behind every sound , sight , touch , taste and smell be a corresponding set of cell that receive this information and interpret it for we . it beg the question : shall we expand our sense of environmental stewardship to include the ecosystem of our own body ?     I invite you to talk about this with I far , and in the meantime , I wish you luck . may none of your non - cancer cell become endangered specie .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   my name be kate hartman . and I like to make device that play with the way that we relate and communicate . so I be specifically interested in how we , as human , relate to ourselves , each other and the world around we . ( laughter ) so just to give you a bit of context , as june say , I be an artist , a technologist and an educator . I teach course in physical computing and wearable electronic . and much of what I do be either wearable or somehow related to the human form .     and so anytime I talk about what I do , I like to just quickly address the reason why body matter . and it be pretty simple . everybody be get one — all of you . I can guarantee , everyone in this room , all of you over there , the people in the cushy seat , the people up top with the laptop — we all have body . do not be ashamed . it be something that we have in common and they act as our primary interface for the world . and so when work as an interaction designer , or as an artist who deal with participation — create thing that live on , in or around the human form — it be really a powerful space to work within .     so within my own work , I use a broad range of material and tool . so I communicate through everything from radio transceiver to funnel and plastic tubing . and to tell you a bit about the thing that I make , the easy place to start the story be with a hat . and so it all start several year ago , late one night when I be sit on the subway , ride home , and I be think . and I tend to be a person who think too much and talk too little . and so I be think about how it might be great if I could just take all these noise — like all these sound of my thought in my head — if I could just physically extricate they and pull they out in such a form that I could share they with somebody else . and so I go home , and I make a prototype of this hat . and I call it the mutter hat , because it emit these mutter noise that be kind of tethered to you , but you could detach they and share they with somebody else .     ( laughter )     so I make other hat as well . this one be call the talk to yourself hat . ( laughter ) it be fairly self - explanatory . it physically carve out conversation space for one . and when you speak out loud , the sound of your voice be actually channel back into your own ear . ( laughter ) and so when I make these thing , it be really not so much about the object itself , but rather the negative space around the object . so what happen when a person put this thing on ? what kind of an experience do they have ? and how be they transform by wear it ?     so many of these device really kind of focus on the way in which we relate to ourselves . so this particular device be call the gut listener . and it be a tool that actually enable one to listen to their own innard . ( laughter ) and so some of these thing be actually more gear toward expression and communication . and so the inflatable heart be an external organ that can be use by the wearer to express themselves . so they can actually inflate it and deflate it accord to their emotion . so they can express everything from admiration and lust to anxiety and angst . ( laughter ) and some of these be actually mean to mediate experience . so the discommunicator be a tool for argument . ( laughter ) and so actually it allow for an intense emotional exchange , but be serve to absorb the specificity of the word that be deliver . ( laughter ) and in the end , some of these thing just act as invitation . so the ear bender literally put something out there so someone can grab your ear and say what they have to say .     so even though I be really interested in the relationship between people , I also consider the way in which we relate to the world around we . and so when I be first live in new york city a few year back , I be think a lot about the familiar architectural form that surround I and how I would like to well relate to they . and I think , " well , hey ! maybe if I want to well relate to wall , maybe I need to be more wall - like myself . " so I make a wearable wall that I could wear as a backpack . and so I would put it on and sort of physically transform myself so that I could either contribute to or critique the space that surround I .     ( laughter )     and so jump off of that , think beyond the build environment into the natural world , I have this ongoing project call botanicall — which actually enable houseplant to tap into human communication protocol . so when a plant be thirsty , it can actually make a phone call or post a message to a service like twitter . and so this really shift the human / plant dynamic , because a single house plant can actually express its need to thousand of people at the same time .     and so kind of think about scale , my most recent obsession be actually with glacier — of course . and so glacier be these magnificent being , and there be lot of reason to be obsess with they , but what I be particularly interested in be in human - glaci relation . ( laughter ) because there seem to be an issue . the glacier be actually leave we . they be both shrink and retreat — and some of they have disappear altogether .     and so I actually live in canada now , so I 've be visit one of my local glacier . and this one be particularly interesting , because , of all the glacier in north america , it receive the high volume of human traffic in a year . they actually have these bus that drive up and over the lateral moraine and drop people off on the surface of the glaci .     and this have really get I think about this experience of the initial encounter . when I meet a glaci for the very first time , what do I do ? there be no kind of social protocol for this . I really just do not even know how to say hello . do I carve a message in the snow ? or perhaps I can assemble one out of dot and dash ice cube — ice cube morse code . or perhaps I need to make myself a speak tool , like an icy megaphone that I can use to amplify my voice when I direct it at the ice . but really the most satisfying experience I 've have be the act of listening , which be what we need in any good relationship .     and I be really strike by how much it affect I . this very basic shift in my physical orientation help I shift my perspective in relation to the glaci . and so since we use device to figure out how to relate to the world these day , I actually make a device call the glaci embrace suit . ( laughter ) and so this be construct out of a heat reflect material that serve to mediate the difference in temperature between the human body and the glacial ice . and once again , it be this invitation that ask people to lay down on the glaci and give it a hug .     so , yea , this be actually just the beginning . these be initial musing for this project . and just as with the wall , how I want to be more wall - like , with this project , I would actually like to take more a of glacial pace . and so my intent be to actually just take the next 10 year and go on a series of collaborative project where I work with people from different discipline — artist , technologist , scientist — to kind of work on this project of how we can improve human - glaci relation .     so beyond that , in closing , I would just like to say that we be in this era of communication and device proliferation , and it be really tremendous and exciting and sexy , but I think what be really important be think about how we can simultaneously maintain a sense of wonder and a sense of criticality about the tool that we use and the way in which we relate to the world .     thank .     ( applause )  
   so I just want to tell you my story . I spend a lot of time teach adult how to use visual language and doodle in the workplace . and naturally , I encounter a lot of resistance , because it be consider to be anti - intellectual and counter to serious learning . but I have a problem with that belief , because I know that doodling have a profound impact on the way that we can process information and the way that we can solve problem .     so I be curious about why there be a disconnect between the way our society perceive doodle and the way that the reality be . so I discover some very interesting thing . for example , there be no such thing as a flattering definition of a doodle . in the 17th century , a doodle be a simpleton or a fool — as in yankee doodle . in the 18th century , it become a verb , and it mean to swindle or ridicule or to make fun of someone . in the 19th century , it be a corrupt politician . and today , we have what be perhaps our most offensive definition , at least to I , which be the follow : to doodle officially mean to dawdle , to dilly dally , to monkey around , to make meaningless mark , to do something of little value , substance or import , and — my personal favorite — to do nothing . no wonder people be averse to doodle at work . do nothing at work be akin to masturbate at work ; it be totally inappropriate .     ( laughter )     additionally , I 've hear horror story from people whose teacher scold they , of course , for doodle in classroom . and they have boss who scold they for doodle in the boardroom . there be a powerful cultural norm against doodle in setting in which we be suppose to learn something . and unfortunately , the press tend to reinforce this norm when they be report on a doodling scene — of an important person at a confirmation hearing and the like — they typically use word like " discover " or " catch " or " find out , " as if there be some sort of criminal act be commit .     and additionally , there be a psychological aversion to doodle — thank you , freud . in the 1930 , freud tell we all that you could analyze people 's psyche base on their doodle . this be not accurate , but it do happen to tony blair at the davos forum in 2005 , when his doodle be , of course , " discover " and he be label the follow thing . now it turn out to be bill gate ' doodle . ( laughter ) and bill , if you be here , nobody think you be megalomaniacal . but that do contribute to people not want to share their doodle .     and here be the real deal . here be what I believe . I think that our culture be so intensely focus on verbal information that we be almost blind to the value of doodling . and I be not comfortable with that . and so because of that belief that I think need to be burst , I be here to send we all hurtle back to the truth . and here be the truth : doodle be an incredibly powerful tool , and it be a tool that we need to remember and to re - learn .     so here be a new definition for doodle . and I hope there be someone in here from the oxford english dictionary , because I want to talk to you later . here be the real definition : doodle be really to make spontaneous mark to help yourself think . that be why million of people doodle . here be another interesting truth about the doodle : people who doodle when they be expose to verbal information retain more of that information than their non - doodling counterpart . we think doodle be something you do when you lose focus , but in reality , it be a preemptive measure to stop you from lose focus . additionally , it have a profound effect on creative problem - solve and deep information processing .     there be four way that learner intake information so that they can make decision . they be visual , auditory , reading and writing and kinesthetic . now in order for we to really chew on information and do something with it , we have to engage at least two of those modality , or we have to engage one of those modality couple with an emotional experience . the incredible contribution of the doodle be that it engage all four learn modality simultaneously with the possibility of an emotional experience . that be a pretty solid contribution for a behavior equate with do nothing .     this be so nerdy , but this make I cry when I discover this . so they do anthropological research into the unfolding of artistic activity in child , and they find that , across space and time , all child exhibit the same evolution in visual logic as they grow . in other word , they have a shared and grow complexity in visual language that happen in a predictable order . and I think that be incredible . I think that mean doodle be native to we and we simply be deny ourselves that instinct . and finally , a lot a people be not privy to this , but the doodle be a precursor to some of our great cultural asset . this be but one : this be frank gehry the architect 's precursor to the guggenheim in abu dhabi .     so here be my point : under no circumstance should doodle be eradicate from a classroom or a boardroom or even the war room . on the contrary , doodle should be leverage in precisely those situation where information density be very high and the need for process that information be very high . and I will go you one far . because doodle be so universally accessible and it be not intimidate as an art form , it can be leverage as a portal through which we move people into high level of visual literacy . my friend , the doodle have never be the nemesis of intellectual thought . in reality , it be one of its great ally .     thank you . ( applause )  
   ( applause )     ( applause )     I be a papercutter . ( laughter ) I cut story . so my process be very straightforward . I take a piece of paper , I visualize my story , sometimes I sketch , sometimes I do not . and as my image be already inside the paper , I just have to remove what be not from that story . so I do not come to papercutte in a straight line . in fact , I see it more as a spiral .     I be not bear with a blade in my hand . and I do not remember papercutte as a child . as a teenager , I be sketch , drawing , and I want to be an artist . but I be also a rebel . and I leave everything and go for a long series of odd job . so among they , I have be a shepherdess , a truck driver , a factory worker , a cleaning lady . I work in tourism for one year in mexico , one year in egypt . I move for two year in taiwan . and then I settle in new york where I become a tour guide . and I still work as a tour leader , travel back and forth in china , tibet and central asia .     so of course , it take time , and I be nearly 40 , and I decide it be time to start as an artist . ( applause ) I choose papercutte because paper be cheap , it be light , and you can use it in a lot of different way . and I choose the language of silhouette because graphically it be very efficient . and it be also just get to the essential of thing . so the word " silhouette " come from a minister of finance , etienne de silhouette . and he slash so many budget that people say they could not afford painting anymore , and they need to have their portrait " a la silhouette . " ( laughter ) so I make series of image , cutting , and I assemble they in portfolio . and people tell I — like these 36 view of the empire state building — they tell I , " you be make artist book . "     so artist book have a lot of definition . they come in a lot of different shape . but to I , they be fascinating object to visually narrate a story . they can be with word or without word . and I have a passion for image and for word . I love pun and the relation to the unconscious . I love oddity of language . and everywhere I live , I learn the language , but never master they . so I be always look for the false cognate or identical word in different language .     so as you can guess , my mother tongue be french . and my daily language be english . so I do a series of work where it be identical word in french and in english . so one of these work be the " spelling spider . " so the spelling spider be a cousin of the spelling bee . ( laughter ) but it be much more connected to the web . ( laughter ) and this spider spin a bilingual alphabet . so you can read " architecture active " or " active architecture . " so this spider go through the whole alphabet with identical adjective and substantive . so if you do not know one of these language , it be instant learning .     and one ancient form of the book be scroll . so scroll be very convenient , because you can create a large image on a very small table . so the unexpected consequence of that be that you only see one part of your image , so it make a very freestyle architecture . and I be make all those kind of window . so it be to look beyond the surface . it be to have a look at different world . and very often I 've be an outsider . so I want to see how thing work and what be happen . so each window be an image and be a world that I often revisit . and I revisit this world think about the image or cliché about what we want to do , and what be the word , colloquialism , that we have with the expression .     it be all if . so what if we be live in balloon house ? it would make a very uplifting world . and we would leave a very low footprint on the planet . it would be so light . so sometimes I view from the inside , like egocentricity and the inner circle . sometimes it be a global view , to see our common root and how we can use they to catch dream . and we can use they also as a safety net .     and my inspiration be very eclectic . I be influence by everything I read , everything I see . I have some story that be humorous , like " dead beat . " ( laughter ) other one be historical . here it be " candycity . " it be a non - sugar - coat history of sugar . it go from slave trade to over - consumption of sugar with some sweet moment in between . and sometimes I have an emotional response to news , such as the 2010 haitian earthquake . other time , it be not even my story . people tell I their life , their memory , their aspiration , and I create a mindscape . I channel their history [ so that ] they have a place to go back to look at their life and its possibility . I call they freudian city .     I can not speak for all my image , so I 'll just go through a few of my world just with the title . " modicity . " " electricity . " " mad growth on columbus circle . " " reefcity . " " a web of time . " " chaos city . " " daily battle . " " felicity . " " float island . " and at one point , I have to do " the whole nine yard . " so it be actually a papercut that be nine yard long . ( laughter ) so in life and in papercutting , everything be connect . one story lead to another . I be also interested in the physicality of this format , because you have to walk to see it .     and parallel to my cutting be my running . I start with small image , I start with a few mile . large image , I start to run marathon . then I go to run 50k , then 60k . then I run 50 mile — ultramarathon . and I still feel I be run , it be just the training to become a long - distance papercutter .     ( laughter )     and running give I a lot of energy . here be a three - week papercutting marathon at the museum of art and design in new york city . the result be " hell and heaven . " it be two panel 13 ft . high . they be instal in the museum on two floor , but in fact , it be a continuous image . and I call it " hell and heaven " because it be daily hell and daily heaven . there be no border in between . some people be bear in hell , and against all odd , they make it to heaven . other people make the opposite trip . that be the border . you have sweatshop in hell . you have people rent their wing in the heaven . and then you have all those individual story where sometimes we even have the same action , and the result put you in hell or in heaven . so the whole " hell and heaven " be about free will and determinism .     and in papercutting , you have the drawing as the structure itself . so you can take it off the wall . here it be an artist book installation call " identity project . " it be not autobiographical identity . they be more our social identity . and then you can just walk behind they and try they on . so it be like the different layer of what we be make of and what we present to the world as an identity .     that be another artist book project . in fact , in the picture , you have two of they . it be one I be wear and one that be on exhibition at the center for book art in new york city . why do I call it a book ? it be call " fashion statement , " and there be quote about fashion , so you can read it , and also , because the definition of artist book be very generous . so artist book , you take they off the wall . you take they for a walk . you can also install they as public art . here it be in scottsdale , arizona , and it be call " float memory . " so it be regional memory , and they be just randomly move by the wind .     I love public art . and I enter competition for a long time . after eight year of rejection , I be thrilled to get my first commission with the percent for art in new york city . it be for a merger station for emergency worker and fireman . I make an artist book that be in stainless steel instead of paper . I call it " work in the same direction . " but I add weathervane on both side to show that they cover all direction . with public art , I could also make cut glass . here it be faceted glass in the bronx . and each time I make public art , I want something that be really relevant to the place it be instal . so for the subway in new york , I see a correspondence between ride the subway and reading . it be travel in time , travel on time . and bronx literature , it be all about bronx writer and their story .     another glass project be in a public library in san jose , california . so I make a vegetable point of view of the growth of san jose . so I start in the center with the acorn for the ohlone indian civilization . then I have the fruit from europe for the rancher . and then the fruit of the world for silicon valley today . and it be still grow . so the technique , it be cut , sandblast , etch and print glass into architectural glass . and outside the library , I want to make a place to cultivate your mind . I take library material that have fruit in their title and I use they to make an orchard walk with these fruit of knowledge . I also plant the bibliotree . so it be a tree , and in its trunk you have the root of language . and it be all about international writing system . and on the branch you have library material grow . you can also have function and form with public art . so in aurora , colorado it be a bench . but you have a bonus with this bench . because if you sit a long time in summer in short , you will walk away with temporary branding of the story element on your thigh .     ( laughter )     another functional work , it be in the south side of chicago for a subway station . and it be call " seed of the future be plant today . " it be a story about transformation and connection . so it act as a screen to protect the rail and the commuter , and not to have object fall on the rail . to be able to change fence and window guard into flower , it be fantastic . and here I 've be work for the last three year with a south bronx developer to bring art to life to low - income building and affordable housing . so each building have its own personality . and sometimes it be about a legacy of the neighborhood , like in morrisania , about the jazz history . and for other project , like in paris , it be about the name of the street . it be call rue des prairie — prairie street . so I bring back the rabbit , the dragonfly , to stay in that street .     and in 2009 , I be ask to make a poster to be place in the subway car in new york city for a year . so that be a very captive audience . and I want to give they an escape . I create " all around town . " it be a papercutting , and then after , I add color on the computer . so I can call it techno - craft .     and along the way , I be kind of make papercutting and add other technique . but the result be always to have story . so the story , they have a lot of possibility . they have a lot of scenario . I do not know the story . I take image from our global imagination , from cliché , from thing we be think about , from history . and everybody be a narrator , because everybody have a story to tell . but more important be everybody have to make a story to make sense of the world . and in all these universe , it be like imagination be the vehicle to be transport with , but the destination be our mind and how we can reconnect with the essential and with the magic . and it be what story cutting be all about .     ( applause )  
   I be here to spread the word about the magnificence of spider and how much we can learn from they . spider be truly global citizen . you can find spider in nearly every terrestrial habitat . this red dot mark the great basin of north america , and I be involve with an alpine biodiversity project there with some collaborator . here be one of our field site , and just to give you a sense of perspective , this little blue smudge here , that be one of my collaborator . this be a rugged and barren landscape , yet there be quite a few spider here . turn rock over reveal this crab spider grappling with a beetle .     spider be not just everywhere , but they be extremely diverse . there be over 40,000 describe specie of spider . to put that number into perspective , here be a graph compare the 40,000 specie of spider to the 400 specie of primate . there be two order of magnitude more spider than primate . spider be also extremely old . on the bottom here , this be the geologic timescale , and the number on it indicate million of year from the present , so the zero here , that would be today . so what this figure show be that spider date back to almost 380 million year . to put that into perspective , this red vertical bar here mark the divergence time of human from chimpanzee , a mere seven million year ago .     all spider make silk at some point in their life . most spider use copious amount of silk , and silk be essential to their survival and reproduction . even fossil spider can make silk , as we can see from this impression of a spinneret on this fossil spider . so this mean that both spider and spider silk have be around for 380 million year . it do not take long from work with spider to start notice how essential silk be to just about every aspect of their life . spider use silk for many purpose , include the trail safety dragline , wrap egg for reproduction , protective retreat and catch prey .     there be many kind of spider silk . for example , this garden spider can make seven different kind of silk . when you look at this orb web , you be actually see many type of silk fiber . the frame and radius of this web be make up of one type of silk , while the capture spiral be a composite of two different silk : the filament and the sticky droplet . how do an individual spider make so many kind of silk ? to answer that , you have to look a lot close at the spinneret region of a spider . so silk come out of the spinneret , and for those of we spider silk biologist , this be what we call the " business end " of the spider . ( laughter ) we spend long day ... hey ! do not laugh . that be my life . ( laughter ) we spend long day and night stare at this part of the spider . and this be what we see . you can see multiple fiber come out of the spinneret , because each spinneret have many spigot on it . each of these silk fiber exit from the spigot , and if you be to trace the fiber back into the spider , what you would find be that each spigot connect to its own individual silk gland . a silk gland kind of look like a sac with a lot of silk protein stick inside . so if you ever have the opportunity to dissect an orb - web - weaving spider , and I hope you do , what you would find be a bounty of beautiful , translucent silk gland .     inside each spider , there be hundred of silk gland , sometimes thousand . these can be group into seven category . they differ by size , shape , and sometimes even color . in an orb - web - weaving spider , you can find seven type of silk gland , and what I have depict here in this picture , let us start at the one o'clock position , there be tubuliform silk gland , which be use to make the outer silk of an egg sac . there be the aggregate and flagelliform silk gland which combine to make the sticky capture spiral of an orb web . pyriform silk gland make the attachment cement — that be the silk that be use to adhere silk line to a substrate . there be also aciniform silk , which be use to wrap prey . minor ampullate silk be use in web construction . and the most studied silk line of they all : major ampullate silk . this be the silk that be use to make the frame and radius of an orb web , and also the safety trail dragline .     but what , exactly , be spider silk ? spider silk be almost entirely protein . you all of these protein can be explain by a single gene family , so this mean that the diversity of silk type we see today be encode by one gene family , so presumably the original spider ancestor make one kind of silk , and over the last 380 million year , that one silk gene have duplicate and then diverge , specialized , over and over and over again , to get the large variety of flavor of spider silk that we have today . there be several feature that all these silk have in common . you all have a common design , such as they be all very long — they be sort of outlandishly long compare to other protein . they be very repetitive , and they be very rich in the amino acids glycine and alanine . to give you an idea of what a spider silk protein look like , this be a dragline silk protein , it be just a portion of it , from the black widow spider . this be the kind of sequence that I love look at day and night . ( laughter )     so what you be see here be the one letter abbreviation for amino acid , and I 've color in the glycine with green , and the alanine in red , and so you can see it be just a lot of g 's and a ' . you can also see that there be a lot of short sequence motif that repeat over and over and over again , so for example there be a lot of what we call polyalanine , or iterate a 's , aaaaa . there be ggq . there be ggy . you can think of these short motif that repeat over and over again as word , and these word occur in sentence . so for example this would be one sentence , and you would get this sort of green region and the red polyalanine , that repeat over and over and over again , and you can have that hundred and hundred and hundred of time within an individual silk molecule .     silk make by the same spider can have dramatically different repeat sequence . at the top of the screen , you be see the repeat unit from the dragline silk of a garden argiope spider . it be short . and on the bottom , this be the repeat sequence for the egg case , or tubuliform silk protein , for the exact same spider . and you can see how dramatically different these silk protein be — so this be sort of the beauty of the diversification of the spider silk gene family . you can see that the repeat unit differ in length . they also differ in sequence . so I 've color in the glycine again in green , alanine in red , and the serine , the letter s , in purple . and you can see that the top repeat unit can be explain almost entirely by green and red , and the bottom repeat unit have a substantial amount of purple . what silk biologist do be we try to relate these sequence , these amino acid sequence , to the mechanical property of the silk fiber .     now , it be really convenient that spider use their silk completely outside their body . this make testing spider silk really , really easy to do in the laboratory , because we be actually , you know , test it in air that be exactly the environment that spider be use their silk protein . so this make quantifying silk property by method such as tensile testing , which be basically , you know , tug on one end of the fiber , very amenable . here be stress - strain curve generate by tensile testing five fiber make by the same spider . so what you can see here be that the five fiber have different behavior . specifically , if you look on the vertical axis , that be stress . if you look at the maximum stress value for each of these fiber , you can see that there be a lot of variation , and in fact dragline , or major ampullate silk , be the strong of these fiber . we think that be because the dragline silk , which be use to make the frame and radii for a web , need to be very strong .     on the other hand , if you be to look at strain — this be how much a fiber can be extend — if you look at the maximum value here , again , there be a lot of variation and the clear winner be flagelliform , or the capture spiral filament . in fact , this flagelliform fiber can actually stretch over twice its original length . so silk fiber vary in their strength and also their extensibility . in the case of the capture spiral , it need to be so stretchy to absorb the impact of fly prey . if it be not able to stretch so much , then basically when an insect hit the web , it would just trampoline right off of it . so if the web be make entirely out of dragline silk , an insect be very likely to just bounce right off . but by have really , really stretchy capture spiral silk , the web be actually able to absorb the impact of that intercept prey .     there be quite a bit of variation within the fiber that an individual spider can make . we call that the tool kit of a spider . that be what the spider have to interact with their environment . but how about variation among spider specie , so look at one type of silk and look at different specie of spider ? this be an area that be largely unexplored but here be a little bit of datum I can show you . this be the comparison of the toughness of the dragline spilk spin by 21 specie of spider . some of they be orb - weave spider and some of they be non - orb - weaving spider . it be be hypothesize that orb - weaving spider , like this argiope here , should have the tough dragline silk because they must intercept fly prey . what you see here on this toughness graph be the high the black dot be on the graph , the high the toughness .     the 21 specie be indicate here by this phylogeny , this evolutionary tree , that show their genetic relationship , and I 've color in yellow the orb - web - weaving spider . if you look right here at the two red arrow , they point to the toughness value for the dragline of nephila clavipe and araneus diadematus . these be the two specie of spider for which the vast majority of time and money on synthetic spider silk research have be to replicate their dragline silk protein . yet , their dragline be not the tough . in fact , the tough dragline in this survey be this one right here in this white region , a non orb - web - weaving spider . this be the dragline spin by scytode , the spitting spider . scytode do not use a web at all to catch prey . instead , scytode sort of lurk around and wait for prey to get close to it , and then immobilize prey by spray a silk - like venom onto that insect . think of hunt with silly string . that be how scytode forage . we do not really know why scytode need such a tough dragline , but it be unexpected result like this that make bio - prospect so exciting and worthwhile . it free we from the constraint of our imagination .     now I be go to mark on the toughness value for nylon fiber , bombyx — or domesticate silkworm silk — wool , kevlar , and carbon fiber . and what you can see be that you all the spider dragline surpass they . it be the combination of strength , extensibility and toughness that make spider silk so special , and that have attract the attention of biomimeticist , so people that turn to nature to try to find new solution . and the strength , extensibility and toughness of spider silk combine with the fact that silk do not elicit an immune response , have attract a lot of interest in the use of spider silk in biomedical application , for example , as a component of artificial tendon , for serve as guide to regrow nerve , and for scaffold for tissue growth .     spider silk also have a lot of potential for their anti - ballistic capability . silk could be incorporate into body and equipment armor that would be more lightweight and flexible than any armor available today . in addition to these biomimetic application of spider silk , personally , I find study spider silk just fascinating in and of itself . I love when I be in the laboratory , a new spider silk sequence come in . that be just the good . ( laughter ) it be like the spider be share an ancient secret with I , and that be why I be go to spend the rest of my life study spider silk . the next time you see a spider web , please , pause and look a little close . you 'll be see one of the most high - performance material know to man . to borrow from the writing of a spider name charlotte , silk be terrific .     thank you . ( applause )     ( applause )  
   when I be nine year old , I go off to summer camp for the first time . and my mother pack I a suitcase full of book , which to I seem like a perfectly natural thing to do . because in my family , reading be the primary group activity . and this might sound antisocial to you , but for we it be really just a different way of be social . you have the animal warmth of your family sit right next to you , but you be also free to go roam around the adventureland inside your own mind . and I have this idea that camp be go to be just like this , but well .     ( laughter )     I have a vision of 10 girl sit in a cabin cozily read book in their matching nightgown .     ( laughter )     camp be more like a keg party without any alcohol . and on the very first day , our counselor gather we all together and she teach we a cheer that she say we would be do every day for the rest of the summer to instill camp spirit . and it go like this : " r - o - w - d - I - e , that be the way we spell rowdie . rowdie , rowdie , let us get rowdie . "     ( laughter )     yeah . so I could not figure out for the life of I why we be suppose to be so rowdy , or why we have to spell this word incorrectly .     ( laughter )     but I recite a cheer . I recite a cheer along with everybody else . I do my good . and I just wait for the time that I could go off and read my book .     but the first time that I take my book out of my suitcase , the cool girl in the bunk come up to I and she ask I , " why be you be so mellow ? " — mellow , of course , be the exact opposite of r - o - w - d - I - e. and then the second time I try it , the counselor come up to I with a concerned expression on her face and she repeat the point about camp spirit and say we should all work very hard to be outgoing .     and so I put my book away , back in their suitcase , and I put they under my bed , and there they stay for the rest of the summer . and I feel kind of guilty about this . I feel as if the book need I somehow , and they be call out to I and I be forsake they . but I do forsake they and I do not open that suitcase again until I be back home with my family at the end of the summer .     now , I tell you this story about summer camp . I could have tell you 50 other just like it — all the time that I get the message that somehow my quiet and introverted style of be be not necessarily the right way to go , that I should be try to pass as more of an extrovert . and I always sense deep down that this be wrong and that introvert be pretty excellent just as they be . but for year I deny this intuition , and so I become a wall street lawyer , of all thing , instead of the writer that I have always long to be — partly because I need to prove to myself that I could be bold and assertive too . and I be always go off to crowded bar when I really would have prefer to just have a nice dinner with friend . and I make these self - negate choice so reflexively , that I be not even aware that I be make they .     now this be what many introvert do , and it be our loss for sure , but it be also our colleague ' loss and our community ' loss . and at the risk of sound grandiose , it be the world 's loss . because when it come to creativity and to leadership , we need introvert do what they do well . a third to a half of the population be introvert — a third to a half . so that be one out of every two or three people you know . so even if you be an extrovert yourself , I be talk about your coworker and your spouse and your child and the person sit next to you right now — all of they subject to this bias that be pretty deep and real in our society . we all internalize it from a very early age without even have a language for what we be do .     now , to see the bias clearly , you need to understand what introversion be . it be different from be shy . shyness be about fear of social judgment . introversion be more about , how do you respond to stimulation , include social stimulation . so extrovert really crave large amount of stimulation , whereas introvert feel at their most alive and their most switch - on and their most capable when they be in quieter , more low - key environment . not all the time — these thing be not absolute — but a lot of the time . so the key then to maximize our talent be for we all to put ourselves in the zone of stimulation that be right for we .     but now here be where the bias come in . our most important institution , our school and our workplace , they be design mostly for extrovert and for extrovert ' need for lot of stimulation . and also we have this belief system right now that I call the new groupthink , which hold that all creativity and all productivity come from a very oddly gregarious place .     so if you picture the typical classroom nowadays : when I be go to school , we sit in row . we sit in row of desk like this , and we do most of our work pretty autonomously . but nowadays , your typical classroom have pod of desk — four or five or six or seven kid all face each other . and kid be work in countless group assignment . even in subject like math and creative writing , which you think would depend on solo flight of thought , kid be now expect to act as committee member . and for the kid who prefer to go off by themselves or just to work alone , those kid be see as outlier often or , bad , as problem case . and the vast majority of teacher report believe that the ideal student be an extrovert as oppose to an introvert , even though introvert actually get well grade and be more knowledgeable , accord to research .     ( laughter )     okay , same thing be true in our workplace . now , most of we work in open plan office , without wall , where we be subject to the constant noise and gaze of our coworker . and when it come to leadership , introvert be routinely pass over for leadership position , even though introvert tend to be very careful , much less likely to take outsize risk — which be something we might all favor nowadays . and interesting research by adam grant at the wharton school have find that introverted leader often deliver well outcome than extrovert do , because when they be manage proactive employee , they be much more likely to let those employee run with their idea , whereas an extrovert can , quite unwittingly , get so excited about thing that they be put their own stamp on thing , and other people 's idea might not as easily then bubble up to the surface .     now in fact , some of our transformative leader in history have be introvert . I 'll give you some example . eleanor roosevelt , rosa parks , gandhi — all these people describe themselves as quiet and soft - spoken and even shy . and you all take the spotlight , even though every bone in their body be tell they not to . and this turn out to have a special power all its own , because people could feel that these leader be at the helm not because they enjoy direct other and not out of the pleasure of be look at ; they be there because they have no choice , because they be drive to do what they think be right .     now I think at this point it be important for I to say that I actually love extrovert . I always like to say some of my good friend be extrovert , include my beloved husband . and we all fall at different point , of course , along the introvert / extrovert spectrum . even carl jung , the psychologist who first popularize these term , say that there be no such thing as a pure introvert or a pure extrovert . he say that such a man would be in a lunatic asylum , if he exist at all . and some people fall smack in the middle of the introvert / extrovert spectrum , and we call these people ambivert . and I often think that they have the good of all world . but many of we do recognize ourselves as one type or the other .     and what I be say be that culturally , we need a much well balance . we need more of a yin and yang between these two type . this be especially important when it come to creativity and to productivity , because when psychologist look at the life of the most creative people , what they find be people who be very good at exchange idea and advance idea , but who also have a serious streak of introversion in they .     and this be because solitude be a crucial ingredient often to creativity . so darwin , he take long walk alone in the wood and emphatically turn down dinner - party invitation . theodor geisel , well know as dr . seuss , he dream up many of his amazing creation in a lonely bell tower office that he have in the back of his house in la jolla , california . and he be actually afraid to meet the young child who read his book for fear that they be expect he this kind of jolly santa claus - like figure and would be disappoint with his more reserve persona . steve wozniak invent the first apple computer sit alone in his cubicle in hewlett - packard where he be work at the time . and he say that he never would have become such an expert in the first place have he not be too introverted to leave the house when he be grow up .     now , of course , this do not mean that we should all stop collaborate — and case in point , be steve wozniak famously come together with steve job to start apple computer — but it do mean that solitude matter and that for some people it be the air that they breathe . and in fact , we have know for century about the transcendent power of solitude . it be only recently that we 've strangely begin to forget it . if you look at most of the world 's major religion , you will find seeker — moses , jesus , buddha , muhammad — seeker who be go off by themselves alone to the wilderness , where they then have profound epiphany and revelation that they then bring back to the rest of the community . so , no wilderness , no revelation .     this be no surprise , though , if you look at the insight of contemporary psychology . it turn out that we can not even be in a group of people without instinctively mirroring , mimic their opinion . even about seemingly personal and visceral thing like who you be attract to , you will start ape the belief of the people around you without even realize that that be what you be do .     and group famously follow the opinion of the most dominant or charismatic person in the room , even though there be zero correlation between be the good talker and have the good idea — I mean zero . so —     ( laughter )     you might be follow the person with the good idea , but you might not . and do you really want to leave it up to chance ? much well for everybody to go off by themselves , generate their own idea free from the distortion of group dynamic , and then come together as a team to talk they through in a well - manage environment and take it from there .     now if all this be true , then why be we get it so wrong ? why be we set up our school this way , and our workplace ? and why be we make these introvert feel so guilty about want to just go off by themselves some of the time ? one answer lie deep in our cultural history . western society , and in particular the u.s . , have always favor the man of action over the " man " of contemplation . but in america 's early day , we live in what historian call a culture of character , where we still , at that point , value people for their inner self and their moral rectitude . and if you look at the self - help book from this era , you all have title with thing like " character , the grandest thing in the world . " and they feature role model like abraham lincoln , who be praise for be modest and unassuming . ralph waldo emerson call he " a man who do not offend by superiority . "     but then we hit the 20th century , and we enter a new culture that historian call the culture of personality . what happen be we have evolve an agricultural economy to a world of big business . and so suddenly people be move from small town to the city . and instead of work alongside people they 've know all their life , now they be have to prove themselves in a crowd of stranger . so , quite understandably , quality like magnetism and charisma suddenly come to seem really important . and sure enough , the self - help book change to meet these new need and they start to have name like " how to win friend and influence people . " and they feature as their role model really great salesman . so that be the world we be live in today . that be our cultural inheritance .     now none of this be to say that social skill be unimportant , and I be also not call for the abolishing of teamwork at all . the same religion who send their sage off to lonely mountain top also teach we love and trust . and the problem that we be face today in field like science and in economic be so vast and so complex that we be go to need army of people come together to solve they work together . but I be say that the more freedom that we give introvert to be themselves , the more likely that they be to come up with their own unique solution to these problem .     so now I would like to share with you what be in my suitcase today . guess what ? book . I have a suitcase full of book . here 's margaret atwood , " cat 's eye . " here be a novel by milan kundera . and here be " the guide for the perplexed " by maimonide . but these be not exactly my book . I bring these book with I because they be write by my grandfather 's favorite author .     my grandfather be a rabbi and he be a widower who live alone in a small apartment in brooklyn that be my favorite place in the world when I be grow up , partly because it be fill with his very gentle , very courtly presence and partly because it be fill with book . I mean literally every table , every chair in this apartment have yield its original function to now serve as a surface for sway stack of book . just like the rest of my family , my grandfather 's favorite thing to do in the whole world be to read .     but he also love his congregation , and you could feel this love in the sermon that he give every week for the 62 year that he be a rabbi . he would take the fruit of each week 's reading and he would weave these intricate tapestry of ancient and humanist thought . and people would come from all over to hear he speak .     but here be the thing about my grandfather . underneath this ceremonial role , he be really modest and really introverted — so much so that when he deliver these sermon , he have trouble make eye contact with the very same congregation that he have be speak to for 62 year . and even away from the podium , when you call he to say hello , he would often end the conversation prematurely for fear that he be take up too much of your time . but when he die at the age of 94 , the police have to close down the street of his neighborhood to accommodate the crowd of people who come out to mourn he . and so these day I try to learn from my grandfather 's example in my own way .     so I just publish a book about introversion , and it take I about seven year to write . and for I , that seven year be like total bliss , because I be read , I be write , I be think , I be research . it be my version of my grandfather 's hour of the day alone in his library . but now all of a sudden my job be very different , and my job be to be out here talk about it , talk about introversion .     ( laughter )     and that be a lot hard for I , because as honor as I be to be here with all of you right now , this be not my natural milieu .     so I prepare for moment like these as well I could . I spend the last year practice public speak every chance I could get . and I call this my " year of speak dangerously . "     ( laughter )     and that actually help a lot . but I 'll tell you , what help even more be my sense , my belief , my hope that when it come to our attitude to introversion and to quiet and to solitude , we truly be poise on the brink on dramatic change . I mean , we be . and so I be go to leave you now with three call for action for those who share this vision .     number one : stop the madness for constant group work . just stop it .     ( laughter )     thank you .     ( applause )     and I want to be clear about what I be say , because I deeply believe our office should be encourage casual , chatty cafe - style type of interaction — you know , the kind where people come together and serendipitously have an exchange of idea . that be great . it be great for introvert and it be great for extrovert . but we need much more privacy and much more freedom and much more autonomy at work . school , same thing . we need to be teach kid to work together , for sure , but we also need to be teach they how to work on their own . this be especially important for extroverte child too . they need to work on their own because that be where deep thought come from in part .     okay , number two : go to the wilderness . be like buddha , have your own revelation . I be not say that we all have to now go off and build our own cabin in the wood and never talk to each other again , but I be say that we could all stand to unplug and get inside our own head a little more often .     number three : take a good look at what be inside your own suitcase and why you put it there . so extrovert , maybe your suitcase be also full of book . or maybe they be full of champagne glass or skydiving equipment . whatever it be , I hope you take these thing out every chance you get and grace we with your energy and your joy . but introvert , you be you , you probably have the impulse to guard very carefully what be inside your own suitcase . and that be okay . but occasionally , just occasionally , I hope you will open up your suitcase for other people to see , because the world need you and it need the thing you carry .     so I wish you the good of all possible journey and the courage to speak softly .     thank you very much .     ( applause )     thank you . thank you .     ( applause )  
   so a couple of year ago I start a program to try to get the rockstar tech and design people to take a year off and work in the one environment that represent pretty much everything they be suppose to hate ; we have they work in government . the program be call code for america , and it be a little bit like a peace corps for geek . we select a few fellow every year and we have they work with city government . instead of send they off into the third world , we send they into the wild of city hall . and there they make great app , they work with city staffer . but really what they be do be they be show what be possible with technology today .     so meet al . al be a fire hydrant in the city of boston . here it kind of look like he be look for a date , but what he be really look for be for someone to shovel he out when he gets snow in , because he know he be not very good at fight fire when he be cover in four foot of snow . now how do he come to be look for help in this very unique manner ? we have a team of fellow in boston last year through the code for america program . they be there in february , and it snow a lot in february last year . and they notice that the city never get to dig out these fire hydrant . but one fellow in particular , a guy name erik michael - ober , notice something else , and that be that citizen be shovel out sidewalk right in front of these thing . so he do what any good developer would do , he write an app .     it be a cute little app where you can adopt a fire hydrant . so you agree to dig it out when it snow . if you do , you get to name it , and he call the first one al . and if you do not , someone can steal it from you . so it be get cute little game dynamic on it . this be a modest little app . it be probably the small of the 21 app that the fellow write last year . but it be do something that no other government technology do . it be spread virally .     there be a guy in the i.t . department of the city of honolulu who see this app and realize that he could use it , not for snow , but to get citizen to adopt tsunami siren . it be very important that these tsunami siren work , but people steal the battery out of they . so he be get citizen to check on they . and then seattle decide to use it to get citizen to clear out clogged storm drain . and chicago just roll it out to get people to sign up to shovel sidewalk when it snow . so we now know of nine city that be plan to use this . and this have spread just frictionlessly , organically , naturally .     if you know anything about government technology , you know that this be not how it normally go . procure software usually take a couple of year . we have a team that work on a project in boston last year that take three people about two and a half month . it be a way that parent could figure out which be the right public school for their kid . we be tell afterward that if that have go through normal channel , it would have take at least two year and it would have cost about two million dollar . and that be nothing . there be one project in the california court system right now that so far cost taxpayer two billion dollar , and it do not work . and there be project like this at every level of government .     so an app that take a couple of day to write and then spread virally , that be sort of a shot across the bow to the institution of government . it suggest how government could work well — not more like a private company , as many people think it should . and not even like a tech company , but more like the internet itself . and that mean permissionless , it mean open , it mean generative . and that be important . but what be more important about this app be that it represent how a new generation be tackle the problem of government — not as the problem of an ossified institution , but as a problem of collective action . and that be great news , because , it turn out , we be very good at collective action with digital technology .     now there be a very large community of people that be build the tool that we need to do thing together effectively . it be not just code for america fellow , there be hundred of people all over the country that be stand and write civic app every day in their own community . they have not give up on government . they be frustrate as hell with it , but they be not complain about it , they be fix it . and these folk know something that we 've lose sight of . and that be that when you strip you all your feeling about politic and the line at the dmv and all those other thing that we be really mad about , government be , at its core , in the word of tim o'reilly , " what we do together that we can not do alone . "     now a lot of people have give up on government . and if you be one of those people , I would ask that you reconsider , because thing be change . politic be not change ; government be change . and because government ultimately derive its power from we — remember " we the people ? " — how we think about it be go to effect how that change happen .     now I do not know very much about government when I start this program . and like a lot of people , I think government be basically about get people elect to office . well after two year , I 've come to the conclusion that , especially local government , be about opossum .     this be the call center for the service and information line . it be generally where you will get if you call 311 in your city . if you should ever have the chance to staff your city 's call center , as our fellow scott silverman do as part of the program — in fact , you all do that — you will find that people call government with a very wide range of issue , include have an opossum stick in your house . so scott get this call . he type " opossum " into this official knowledge base . he do not really come up with anything . he start with animal control . and finally , he say , " look , can you just open all the door to your house and play music really loud and see if the thing leave ? " so that work . so booya for scott . but that be not the end of the opossum .     boston do not just have a call center . it have an app , a web and mobile app , call citizen connect . now we do not write this app . this be the work of the very smart people at the office of new urban mechanic in boston . so one day — this be an actual report — this come in : " opossum in my trashcan . can not tell if it be dead . how do I get this removed ? " but what happen with citizen connect be different . so scott be speak person - to - person . but on citizen connect everything be public , so everybody can see this . and in this case , a neighbor see it . and the next report we got say , " I walk over to this location , find the trashcan behind the house . opossum ? check . live ? yep . turn trashcan on its side . walk home . goodnight sweet opossum . "     ( laughter )     pretty simple . so this be great . this be the digital meeting the physical . and it be also a great example of government get in on the crowd - source game . but it be also a great example of government as a platform . and I do not mean necessarily a technological definition of platform here . I be just talk about a platform for people to help themselves and to help other . so one citizen help another citizen , but government play a key role here . it connect those two people . and it could have connect they with government service if they have be need , but a neighbor be a far well and cheap alternative to government service . when one neighbor help another , we strengthen our community . we call animal control , it just cost a lot of money .     now one of the important thing we need to think about government be that it be not the same thing as politic . and most people get that , but they think that one be the input to the other . that our input to the system of government be vote . now how many time have we elect a political leader — and sometimes we spend a lot of energy get a new political leader elect — and then we sit back and we expect government to reflect our value and meet our need , and then not that much change ? that be because government be like a vast ocean and politic be the six - inch layer on top . and what be under that be what we call bureaucracy . and we say that word with such contempt . but it be that contempt that keep this thing that we own and we pay for as something that be work against we , this other thing , and then we be disempowere ourselves .     people seem to think politic be sexy . if we want this institution to work for we , we be go to have to make bureaucracy sexy . because that be where the real work of government happen . we have to engage with the machinery of government . so that 's occupythesec movement have do . have you see these guy ? it be a group of concerned citizen that have write a very detailed 325 - page report that be a response to the sec 's request for comment on the financial reform bill . that be not be politically active , that be be bureaucratically active .     now for those of we who 've give up on government , it be time that we ask ourselves about the world that we want to leave for our child . you have to see the enormous challenge that they be go to face . do we really think we be go to get where we need to go without fix the one institution that can act on behalf of all of we ? we can not do without government , but we do need it to be more effective . the good news be that technology be make it possible to fundamentally reframe the function of government in a way that can actually scale by strengthen civil society . and there be a generation out there that be grow up on the internet , and they know that it be not that hard to do thing together , you just have to architect the system the right way .     now the average age of our fellow be 28 , so I be , begrudgingly , almost a generation old than most of they . this be a generation that be grow up take their voice pretty much for grant . they be not fight that battle that we be all fight about who get to speak ; you all get to speak . they can express their opinion on any channel at any time , and they do . so when they be face with the problem of government , they do not care as much about use their voice . they be use their hand . they be use their hand to write application that make government work well .     and those application let we use our hand to make our community well . that could be shovel out a hydrant , pull a weed , turn over a garbage can with an opossum in it . and certainly , we could have be shovel out those fire you all along , and many people do . but these app be like little digital reminder that we be not just consumer , and we be not just consumer of government , put in our taxis and get back service . we be more than that , we be citizen . and we be not go to fix government until we fix citizenship .     so the question I have for all of you here : when it come to the big , important thing that we need to do together , all of we together , be we just go to be a crowd of voice , or be we also go to be a crowd of hand ?     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be go to tell you a little bit about my tedxhouston talk . I wake up the morning after I give that talk with the bad vulnerability hangover of my life . and I actually do not leave my house for about three day .     the first time I leave be to meet a friend for lunch . and when I walk in , she be already at the table . I sit down , and she say , " god , you look like hell . " I say , " thank . I feel really — I be not function . " and she say , " what be go on ? " and I say , " I just tell 500 people that I become a researcher to avoid vulnerability . and that when be vulnerable emerge from my datum , as absolutely essential to whole - hearted living , I tell these 500 people that I have a breakdown . I have a slide that say ' breakdown . ' at what point do I think that be a good idea ? "     ( laughter )     and she say , " I see your talk live - stream . it be not really you . it be a little different than what you usually do . but it be great . " and I say , " this can not happen . youtube , they be put this thing on youtube . and we be go to be talk about 600 , 700 people . "     ( laughter )     and she say , " well , I think it be too late . "     and I say , " let I ask you something . " and she say , " yeah . " I say , " do you remember when we be in college , really wild and kind of dumb ? " she say , " yeah . " I say , " remember when we would leave a really bad message on our ex - boyfriend 's answer machine ? then we would have to break into his dorm room and then erase the tape ? "     ( laughter )     and she go , " uh ... no . "     ( laughter )     of course , the only thing I could say at that point be , " yeah , I neither . yeah — I neither . "     and I be think to myself , " brené , what be you do ? why do you bring this up ? have you lose your mind ? your sister would be perfect for this . "     ( laughter )     so I look back up and she say , " be you really go to try to break in and steal the video before they put it on youtube ? "     ( laughter )     and I say , " I be just think about it a little bit . "     ( laughter )     she say , " you be like the bad vulnerability role model ever . "     ( laughter )     then I look at she and I say something that at the time feel a little dramatic , but end up be more prophetic than dramatic . " if 500 turn into 1,000 or 2,000 , my life be over . "     ( laughter )     I have no contingency plan for four million .     ( laughter )     and my life do end when that happen . and maybe the hard part about my life end be that I learn something hard about myself , and that be that , as much as I would be frustrate about not be able to get my work out to the world , there be a part of I that be work very hard to engineer stay small , stay right under the radar . but I want to talk about what I 've learn .     there be two thing that I 've learn in the last year . the first be : vulnerability be not weakness . and that myth be profoundly dangerous . let I ask you honestly — and I 'll give you this warning , I be train as a therapist , so I can out - wait you uncomfortably — so if you could just raise your hand that would be awesome — how many of you honestly , when you be think about do or say something vulnerable think , " god , vulnerability be weakness . " how many of you think of vulnerability and weakness synonymously ? the majority of people . now let I ask you this question : this past week at ted , how many of you , when you see vulnerability up here , think it be pure courage ? vulnerability be not weakness . I define vulnerability as emotional risk , exposure , uncertainty . it fuel our daily life . and I 've come to the belief — this be my 12th year do this research — that vulnerability be our most accurate measurement of courage — to be vulnerable , to let ourselves be see , to be honest .     one of the weird thing that be happen be , after the ted explosion , I get a lot of offer to speak all over the country — everyone from school and parent meeting to fortune 500 company . and so many of the call go like this , " dr . brown , we love your ted talk . we would like you to come in and speak . we would appreciate it if you would not mention vulnerability or shame . "     ( laughter )     what would you like for I to talk about ? there be three big answer . this be mostly , to be honest with you , from the business sector : innovation , creativity and change .     ( laughter )     so let I go on the record and say , vulnerability be the birthplace of innovation , creativity and change .     ( applause )     to create be to make something that have never exist before . there be nothing more vulnerable than that . adaptability to change be all about vulnerability .     the second thing , in addition to really finally understand the relationship between vulnerability and courage , the second thing I learn , be this : we have to talk about shame . and I be go to be really honest with you . when I become a " vulnerability researcher " and that become the focus because of the ted talk — and I be not kid .     I 'll give you an example . about three month ago , I be in a sporting good store buying goggle and shin guard and all the thing that parent buy at the sporting good store . about from a hundred foot away , this be what I hear : " vulnerability ted ! vulnerability ted ! "     ( laughter )     ( laughter end )     I be a fifth - generation texan . our family motto be " lock and load . " I be not a natural vulnerability researcher . so I be like , just keep walk , she be on my six .     ( laughter )     and then I hear , " vulnerability ted ! " I turn around , I go , " hi . " she be right here and she say , " you be the shame researcher who have the breakdown . "     ( laughter )     at this point , parent be , like , pull their child close .     ( laughter )     " look away . " and I be so wear out at this point in my life , I look at she and I actually say , " it be a fricke spiritual awakening . "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     and she look back and do this , " I know . "     ( laughter )     and she say , " we watch your ted talk in my book club . then we read your book and we rename ourselves ' the breakdown babe . ' "     ( laughter )     and she say , " our tagline be : ' we be fall apart and it feel fantastic . ' "     ( laughter )     you can only imagine what it be like for I in a faculty meeting .     ( sigh )     so when I become vulnerability ted , like an action figure — like ninja barbie , but I be vulnerability ted — I think , I be go to leave that shame stuff behind , because I spend six year study shame before I start write and talk about vulnerability . and I think , thank god , because shame be this horrible topic , no one want to talk about it . it be the good way to shut people down on an airplane . " what do you do ? " " I study shame . " " oh . "     ( laughter )     and I see you .     ( laughter )     but in survive this last year , I be remind of a cardinal rule — not a research rule , but a moral imperative from my upbringing — " you 've get to dance with the one who brung ya " . and I do not learn about vulnerability and courage and creativity and innovation from study vulnerability . I learn about these thing from study shame . and so I want to walk you in to shame . jungian analyst call shame the swampland of the soul . and we be go to walk in . and the purpose be not to walk in and construct a home and live there . it be to put on some galosh — and walk through and find our way around . here be why .     we hear the most compelling call ever to have a conversation in this country , and I think globally , around race , right ? yes ? we hear that . yes ? can not have that conversation without shame . because you can not talk about race without talk about privilege . and when people start talk about privilege , they get paralyze by shame . we hear a brilliant simple solution to not kill people in surgery , which be , have a checklist . you can not fix that problem without address shame , because when they teach those folk how to suture , they also teach they how to stitch their self - worth to be all - powerful . and all - powerful folk do not need checklist .     and I have to write down the name of this ted fellow so I do not mess it up here . myshkin ingawale , I hope I do right by you .     ( applause )     I see the ted fellow my first day here . and he get up and he explain how he be drive to create some technology to help test for anemia , because people be die unnecessarily . and he say , " I see this need . so you know what I do ? I make it . " and everybody just burst into applause , and they be like " yes ! " and he say , " and it do not work .     ( laughter )     and then I make it 32 more time , and then it work . "     you know what the big secret about ted be ? I can not wait to tell people this . I guess I be do it right now .     ( laughter )     this be like the failure conference .     ( laughter )     no , it be .     ( applause )     you know why this place be amazing ? because very few people here be afraid to fail . and no one who get on the stage , so far that I 've see , have not fail . I 've fail miserably , many time . I do not think the world understand that , because of shame .     there be a great quote that save I this past year by theodore roosevelt . a lot of people refer to it as the " man in the arena " quote . and it go like this : " it be not the critic who count . it be not the man who sit and point out how the doer of deed could have do thing well and how he fall and stumble . the credit go to the man in the arena whose face be mar with dust and blood and sweat . but when he be in the arena , at good , he win , and at bad , he lose , but when he fail , when he lose , he do so dare greatly . "     and that be what this conference , to I , be about . life be about dare greatly , about be in the arena . when you walk up to that arena and you put your hand on the door , and you think , " I be go in and I be go to try this , " shame be the gremlin who say , " uh , uh . you be not good enough . you never finish that mba . your wife leave you . I know your dad really be not in luxembourg , he be in sing sing . I know those thing that happen to you grow up . I know you do not think that you be pretty , smart , talented or powerful enough . I know your dad never pay attention , even when you make cfo . " shame be that thing .     and if we can quiet it down and walk in and say , " I be go to do this , " we look up and the critic that we see point and laugh , 99 percent of the time be who ? we . shame drive two big tape — " never good enough " — and , if you can talk it out of that one , " who do you think you be ? " the thing to understand about shame be , it be not guilt . shame be a focus on self , guilt be a focus on behavior . shame be " I be bad . " guilt be " I do something bad . " how many of you , if you do something that be hurtful to I , would be willing to say , " I be sorry . I make a mistake ? " how many of you would be willing to say that ? guilt : I be sorry . I make a mistake . shame : I be sorry . I be a mistake .     there be a huge difference between shame and guilt . and here be what you need to know . shame be highly , highly correlate with addiction , depression , violence , aggression , bullying , suicide , eat disorder . and here be what you even need to know more . guilt , inversely correlate with those thing . the ability to hold something we 've do or fail to do up against who we want to be be incredibly adaptive . it be uncomfortable , but it be adaptive .     the other thing you need to know about shame be it be absolutely organize by gender . if shame wash over I and wash over chris , it be go to feel the same . everyone sit in here know the warm wash of shame . we be pretty sure that the only people who do not experience shame be people who have no capacity for connection or empathy . which mean , yes , I have a little shame ; no , I be a sociopath . so I would opt for , yes , you have a little shame . shame feel the same for man and woman , but it be organize by gender .     for woman , the good example I can give you be enjoli , the commercial . " I can put the wash on the line , pack the lunch , hand out the kiss and be at work at five to nine . I can bring home the bacon , fry it up in the pan and never let you forget you be a man . " for woman , shame be , do it all , do it perfectly and never let they see you sweat . I do not know how much perfume that commercial sell , but I guarantee you , it move a lot of antidepressant and anti - anxiety med .     ( laughter )     shame , for woman , be this web of unobtainable , conflicting , compete expectation about who we be suppose to be . and it be a straight - jacket .     for man , shame be not a bunch of compete , conflicting expectation . shame be one , do not be perceive as what ? weak . I do not interview man for the first four year of my study . it be not until a man look at I after a book signing , and say , " I love what say about shame , I be curious why you do not mention man . " and I say , " I do not study man . " and he say , " that be convenient . "     ( laughter )     and I say , " why ? " and he say , " because you say to reach out , tell our story , be vulnerable . but you see those book you just sign for my wife and my three daughter ? " I say , " yeah . " " they would rather I die on top of my white horse than watch I fall down . when we reach out and be vulnerable , we get the shit beat out of we . and do not tell I it be from the guy and the coach and the dad . because the woman in my life be hard on I than anyone else . "     so I start interview man and ask question . and what I learn be this : you show I a woman who can actually sit with a man in real vulnerability and fear , I 'll show you a woman who be do incredible work . you show I a man who can sit with a woman who be just have it , she can not do it all anymore , and his first response be not , " I unload the dishwasher ! "     ( laughter )     but he really listen — because that be all we need — I 'll show you a guy who be do a lot of work .     shame be an epidemic in our culture . and to get out from underneath it — to find our way back to each other , we have to understand how it affect we and how it affect the way we be parent , the way we be work , the way we be look at each other . very quickly , some research by mahalik at boston college . he ask , what do woman need to do to conform to female norm ? the top answer in this country : nice , thin , modest and use all available resource for appearance .     ( laughter )     when he ask about man , what do man in this country need to do to conform with male norm , the answer be : always show emotional control , work be first , pursue status and violence .     if we be go to find our way back to each other , we have to understand and know empathy , because empathy 's the antidote to shame . if you put shame in a petri dish , it need three thing to grow exponentially : secrecy , silence and judgment . if you put the same amount in a petri dish and douse it with empathy , it can not survive . the two most powerful word when we be in struggle : I too .     and so I 'll leave you with this thought . if we be go to find our way back to each other , vulnerability be go to be that path . and I know it be seductive to stand outside the arena , because I think I do it my whole life , and think to myself , I be go to go in there and kick some ass when I be bulletproof and when I be perfect . and that be seductive . but the truth be , that never happen . and even if you get as perfect as you could and as bulletproof as you could possibly muster when you get in there , that be not what we want to see . we want you to go in . we want to be with you and across from you . and we just want , for ourselves and the people we care about and the people we work with , to dare greatly .     so thank you all very much . I really appreciate it .     ( applause )  
   you should be nice to nerd . in fact , I would go so far as to say , if you do not already have a nerd in your life , you should get one . I be just say . scientist and engineer change the world . I would like to tell you about a magical place call darpa where scientist and engineer defy the impossible and refuse to fear failure . now these two idea be connect more than you may realize , because when you remove the fear of failure , impossible thing suddenly become possible .     if you want to know how , ask yourself this question : what would you attempt to do if you know you could not fail ? if you really ask yourself this question , you can not help but feel uncomfortable . I feel a little uncomfortable . because when you ask it , you begin to understand how the fear of failure constrain you , how it keep we from attempt great thing , and life get dull , amazing thing stop happen . sure , good thing happen , but amazing thing stop happen .     now I should be clear , I be not encourage failure , I be discourage fear of failure . because it be not failure itself that constrain we . the path to truly new , never - be - do - before thing always have failure along the way . we be test . and in part , that testing feel an appropriate part of achieve something great . clemenceau say , " life get interesting when we fail , because it be a sign that we 've surpass ourselves . "     in 1895 , lord kelvin declare that heavy - than - air fly machine be impossible . in october of 1903 , the prevail opinion of expert aerodynamicist be that maybe in 10 million year we could build an aircraft that would fly . and two month later on december 17th , orville wright power the first airplane across a beach in north carolina . the flight last 12 second and cover 120 foot . that be 1903 .     one year later , the next declaration of impossibility begin . ferdinand foch , a french army general credit with have one of the most original and subtle mind in the french army , say , " airplane be interesting toy , but of no military value . " 40 year later , aero expert coin the term transonic . they debate , should it have one s or two ? you see , they be have trouble in this flight regime , and it be not at all clear that we could fly fast than the speed of sound . in 1947 , there be no wind tunnel datum beyond mach 0.85 . and yet , on tuesday , october 14th , 1947 , chuck yeager climb into the cockpit of his bell x-1 and he fly towards an unknown possibility , and in so do , he become the first pilot to fly fast than the speed of sound . six of eight atlas rocket blow up on the pad . after 11 complete mission failure , we get our first image from space . and on that first flight we get more datum than in all u-2 mission combine . it take a lot of failure to get there .     since we take to the sky , we have want to fly fast and far . and to do so , we 've have to believe in impossible thing . and we 've have to refuse to fear failure . that be still true today . today , we do not talk about fly transonically , or even supersonically , we talk about fly hypersonically — not mach 2 or mach 3 , mach 20 . at mach 20 , we can fly from new york to long beach in 11 minute and 20 second . at that speed , the surface of the airfoil be the temperature of molten steel — 3,500 degree fahrenheit — like a blast furnace . we be essentially burn the airfoil as we fly it . and we be fly it , or try to .     darpa 's hypersonic test vehicle be the fast maneuvering aircraft ever build . it be boost to near - space atop a minotaur iv rocket . now the minotaur iv have too much impulse , so we have to bleed it off by fly the rocket at an 89 degree angle of attack for portion of the trajectory . that be an unnatural act for a rocket . the third stage have a camera . we call it rocketcam . and it be point at the hypersonic glider . this be the actual rocketcam footage from flight one . now to conceal the shape , we change the aspect ratio a little bit . but this be what it look like from the third stage of the rocket look at the unmanned glider as it head into the atmosphere back towards earth .     we 've fly twice . in the first flight , no aerodynamic control of the vehicle . but we collect more hypersonic flight datum than in 30 year of ground - base testing combine . and in the second flight , three minute of fully - control , aerodynamic flight at mach 20 . we must fly again , because amazing , never - be - do - before thing require that you fly . you can not learn to fly at mach 20 unless you fly . and while there be no substitute for speed , maneuverability be a very close second .     if a mach 20 glider take 11 minute and 20 second to get from new york to long beach , a hummingbird would take , well , day . you see , hummingbird be not hypersonic , but they be maneuverable . in fact , the hummingbird be the only bird that can fly backwards . it can fly up , down , forwards , backwards , even upside - down . and so if we want to fly in this room or place where human can not go , we would need an aircraft small enough and maneuverable enough to do so .     this be a hummingbird drone . it can fly in all direction , even backwards . it can hover and rotate . this prototype aircraft be equip with a video camera . it weigh less than one aa battery . it do not eat nectar . in 2008 , it fly for a whopping 20 second , a year later , two minute , then six , eventually 11 . many prototype crash — many . but there be no way to learn to fly like a hummingbird unless you fly . ( applause ) it be beautiful , be not it . wow . it be great . matt be the first ever hummingbird pilot . ( applause )     failure be part of create new and amazing thing . we can not both fear failure and make amazing new thing — like a robot with the stability of a dog on rough terrain , or maybe even ice ; a robot that can run like a cheetah , or climb stair like a human with the occasional clumsiness of a human . or perhaps , spider man will one day be gecko man . a gecko can support its entire body weight with one toe . one square millimeter of a gecko 's footpad have 14,000 hair - like structure call seta . they be use to help it grip to surface use intermolecular force .     today we can manufacture structure that mimic the hair of a gecko 's foot . the result , a four - by - four - inch artificial nano - gecko adhesive . can support a static load of 660 pound . that be enough to stick six 42 - inch plasma tv 's to your wall , no nail . so much for velcro , right ?     and it be not just passive structure , it be entire machine . this be a spider mite . it be one millimeter long , but it look like godzilla next to these micromachine . in the world of godzilla spider mite , we can make million of mirror , each one - fifth the diameter of a human hair , move at hundred of thousand of time per second to make large screen display , so that we can watch movie like " godzilla " in high - def .     and if we can build machine at that scale , what about eiffel tower - like truss at the microscale ? today we be make metal that be light than styrofoam , so light they can sit atop a dandelion puff and be blow away with a wisp of air — so light that you can make a car that two people can lift , but so strong that it have the crash - worthiness of an suv .     from the small wisp of air to the powerful force of nature 's storm . there be 44 lightning strike per second around the globe . each lightning bolt heat the air to 44,000 degree fahrenheit — hot than the surface of the sun . what if we could use these electromagnetic pulse as beacon , beacon in a move network of powerful transmitter ? experiment suggest that lightning could be the next gps .     electrical pulse form the thought in our brain . use a grid the size of your thumb , with 32 electrode on the surface of his brain , tim use his thought to control an advanced prosthetic arm . and his thought make he reach for katie . this be the first time a human have control a robot with thought alone . and it be the first time that tim have hold katie 's hand in seven year . that moment matter to tim and katie , and this green goo may someday matter to you . this green goo be perhaps the vaccine that could save your life . it be make in tobacco plant . tobacco plant can make million of dose of vaccine in week instead of month , and it might just be the first healthy use of tobacco ever .     and if it seem far - fetched that tobacco plant could make people healthy , what about gamer that could solve problem that expert can not solve ? last september , the gamer of foldit solve the three - dimensional structure of the retroviral protease that contribute to aid in rhesus monkey . now understand this structure be very important for develop treatment . for 15 year , it be unsolved in the scientific community . the gamer of foldit solve it in 15 day . now they be able to do so by work together . they be able to work together because they be connect by the internet . and other , also connect to the internet , use it as an instrument of democracy . and together they change the fate of their nation .     the internet be home to two billion people , or 30 percent of the world 's population . it allow we to contribute and to be hear as individual . it allow we to amplify our voice and our power as a group . but it too have humble beginning . in 1969 , the internet be but a dream , a few sketch on a piece of paper . and then on october 29th , the first packet - switch message be send from ucla to sri . the first two letter of the word " login , " that be all that make it through — an l and an o — and then a buffer overflow crash the system . ( laughter ) two letter , an l and an o , now a worldwide force .     so who be these scientist and engineer at a magical place call darpa ? they be nerd , and they be hero among we . they challenge exist perspective at the edge of science and under the most demanding of condition . they remind we that we can change the world if we defy the impossible and we refuse to fear failure . they remind we that we all have nerd power . sometimes we just forget .     you see , there be a time when you be not afraid of failure , when you be a great artist or a great dancer and you could sing , you be good at math , you could build thing , you be an astronaut , an adventurer , jacques cousteau , you could jump higher , run fast , kick hard than anyone . you believe in impossible thing and you be fearless . you be totally and completely in touch with your inner superhero . scientist and engineer can indeed change the world . so can you . you be bear to . so go ahead , ask yourself , what would you attempt to do if you know you could not fail ?     now I want to say , this be not easy . it be hard to hold onto this feeling , really hard . I guess in some way , I sort of believe it be suppose to be hard . doubt and fear always creep in . we think someone else , someone smart than we , someone more capable , someone with more resource will solve that problem . but there be not anyone else ; there be just you . and if we be lucky , in that moment , someone step into that doubt and fear , take a hand and say , " let I help you believe . "     jason harley do that for I . jason start at darpa on march 18th , 2010 . he be with our transportation team . I see jason nearly every day , sometimes twice a day . and more so than most , he see the high and the low , the celebration and the disappointment . and on one particularly dark day for I , jason sit down and he write an email . he be encouraging , but firm . and when he hit send , he probably do not realize what a difference it would make . it matter to I . in that moment and still today when I doubt , when I feel afraid , when I need to reconnect with that feeling , I remember his word , they be so powerful .     text : " there be only time enough to iron your cape and back to the sky for you . "     ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫     voice : because that be what be a superhero be all about .     rd : " there be only time enough to iron your cape and back to the sky for you . " and remember , be nice to nerd . ( applause ) thank you . thank you .     ( applause )     chris anderson : regina , thank you . I have a couple of question . so that glider of your , the mach 20 glider , the first one , no control , it end up in the pacific I think somewhere .     rd : yeah , yeah . it do . ( can : what happen on that second flight ? ) yeah , it also go into the pacific . ( can : but this time under control ? ) we do not fly it into the pacific . no , there be multiple portion of the trajectory that be demand in term of really fly at that speed . and so in the second flight , we be able to get three minute of fully aerodynamic control of the vehicle before we lose it .     can : I imagine you be not plan to open up to passenger service from new york to long beach anytime soon .     rd : it might be a little warm .     can : what do you picture that glider be use for ?     rd : well our responsibility be to develop the technology for this . how it be ultimately use will be determine by the military . now the purpose of the vehicle though , the purpose of the technology , be to be able to reach anywhere in the world in less than 60 minute .     can : and to carry a payload of more than a few pound ? ( rd : yeah . ) like what be the payload it could carry ?     rd : well I do not think we ultimately know what it will be , right . we 've get to fly it first .     can : but not necessarily just a camera ?     rd : no , not necessarily just a camera .     can : it be amazing . the hummingbird ?     rd : yeah ?     can : I be curious , you start your beautiful sequence on flight with a plane kind of try to flap its wing and fail horribly , and there have not be that many plane build since that flap wing . why do we think that this be the time to go biomimicry and copy a hummingbird ? be not that a very expensive solution for a small maneuverable fly object ?     rd : so I mean , in part , we wonder if it be possible to do it . and you have to revisit these question over time . the folk at aerovironment try 300 or more different wing design , 12 different form of the avionic . it take they 10 full prototype to get something that would actually fly . but there be something really interesting about a fly machine that look like something you would recognize . so we often talk about stealth as a means for avoid any type of sensing , but when thing look just natural , you also do not see they .     can : ah . so it be not necessarily just the performance . it be partly the look . ( rd : sure . ) it be actually , " look at that cute hummingbird fly into my headquarters . " ( laughter ) because I think , as well as the awe of look at that , I be sure some people here be think , technology catch up so quick , how long be it before some craze geek with a little remote control fly one through a window of the white house ? I mean , do you worry about the pandora 's box issue here ?     rd : well look , our singular mission be the creation and prevention of strategic surprise . that be what we do . it would be inconceivable for we to do that work if we do not make people excited and uncomfortable with the thing that we do at the same time . it be just the nature of what we do . now our responsibility be to push that edge . and we have to be , of course , mindful and responsible of how the technology be develop and ultimately use , but we can not simply close our eye and pretend that it be not advance ; it be advance .     can : I mean , you be clearly a really inspiring leader . and you persuade people to go to these great feat of invention , but at a personal level , in a way I can not imagine do your job . do you wake up in the night sometimes , just ask question about the possibly unintended consequence of your team 's brilliance ?     rd : sure . I think you could not be human if you do not ask those question .     can : how do you answer they ?     rd : well I do not always have answer for they , right . I think that we learn as time go on . my job be one of the most exhilarating job you could have . I work with some of the most amazing people . and with that exhilaration , come a really deep sense of responsibility . and so you have on the one hand this tremendous lift of what be possible and this tremendous seriousness of what it mean .     can : regina , that be jaw - dropping , as they say . thank you so much for come to ted . ( rd : thank you . )     ( applause )  
   many time I go around the world to speak , and people ask I question about the challenge , my moment , some of my regret . 1998 : a single mother of four , three month after the birth of my fourth child , I go to do a job as a research assistant . I go to northern liberia . and as part of the work , the village would give you lodging . and they give I lodge with a single mother and her daughter .     this girl happen to be the only girl in the entire village who have make it to the ninth grade . she be the laugh stock of the community . her mother be often tell by other woman , " you and your child will die poor . " after two week of work in that village , it be time to go back . the mother come to I , knelt down , and say , " leymah , take my daughter . I wish for she to be a nurse . " dirt poor , live in the home with my parent , I could not afford to . with tear in my eye , I say , " no . "     two month later , I go to another village on the same assignment and they ask I to live with the village chief . the woman 's chief of the village have this little girl , fair color like I , totally dirty . and all day she walk around only in her underwear . when I ask , " who be that ? " she say , " that be wei . the meaning of her name be pig . her mother die while give birth to she , and no one have any idea who her father be . " for two week , she become my companion , sleep with I . I buy she use clothe and buy she her first doll . the night before I leave , she come to the room and say , " leymah , do not leave I here . I wish to go with you . I wish to go to school . " dirt poor , no money , live with my parent , I again say , " no . " two month later , both of those village fall into another war . till today , I have no idea where those two girl be .     fast - forward , 2004 : in the peak of our activism , the minister of gender liberia call I and say , " leymah , I have a nine - year - old for you . I want you to bring her home because we do not have safe home . " the story of this little girl : she have be rape by her paternal grandfather every day for six month . she come to I bloated , very pale . every night I would come from work and lie on the cold floor . she would lie beside I and say , " auntie , I wish to be well . I wish to go to school . "     2010 : a young woman stand before president sirleaf and give her testimony of how she and her sibling live together , their father and mother die during the war . she be 19 ; her dream be to go to college to be able to support they . she be highly athletic . one of the thing that happen be that she apply for a scholarship . full scholarship . she get it . her dream of go to school , her wish of be educate , be finally here . she go to school on the first day . the director of sport who be responsible for get she into the program ask she to come out of class . and for the next three year , her fate will be have sex with he every day , as a favor for get she in school .     globally , we have policy , international instrument , work leader . great people have make commitment — we will protect our child from want and from fear . the u.n . have the convention on the right of the child . country like america , we 've hear thing like no child leave behind . other country come with different thing . there be a millennium development call three that focus on girl . all of these great work by great people aim at get young people to where we want to get they globally , I think , have fail .     in liberia , for example , the teenage pregnancy rate be three to every 10 girl . teen prostitution be at its peak . in one community , we be tell , you wake up in the morning and see use condom like use chew gum paper . girl as young as 12 be prostitute for less than a dollar a night . it be dishearten , it be sad . and then someone ask I , just before my tedtalk , a few day ago , " so where be the hope ? "     several year ago , a few friend of mine decide we need to bridge the disconnect between our generation and the generation of young woman . it be not enough to say you have two nobel laureate from the republic of liberia when your girl ' kid be totally out there and no hope , or seemingly no hope . we create a space call the young girl transformative project . we go into rural community and all we do , like have be do in this room , be create the space . when these girl sit , you unlock intelligence , you unlock passion , you unlock commitment , you unlock focus , you unlock great leader . today , we 've work with over 300 . and some of those girl who walk in the room very shy have take bold step , as young mother , to go out there and advocate for the right of other young woman .     one young woman I meet , teen mother of four , never think about finish high school , graduate successfully ; never think about go to college , enrol in college . one day she say to I , " my wish be to finish college and be able to support my child . " she be at a place where she can not find money to go to school . she sell water , sell soft drink and sell recharge card for cellphone . and you would think she would take that money and put it back into her education . juanita be her name . she take that money and find single mother in her community to send back to school . say , " leymah , my wish be to be educate . and if I can not be educate , when I see some of my sister be educate , my wish have be fulfil . I wish for a well life . I wish for food for my child . I wish that sexual abuse and exploitation in school would stop . " this be the dream of the african girl .     several year ago , there be one african girl . this girl have a son who wish for a piece of doughnut because he be extremely hungry . angry , frustrated , really upset about the state of her society and the state of her child , this young girl start a movement , a movement of ordinary woman band together to build peace . I will fulfill the wish . this be another african girl 's wish . I fail to fulfill the wish of those two girl . I fail to do this . these be the thing that be go through the head of this other young woman — I fail , I fail , I fail . so I will do this . woman come out , protest a brutal dictator , fearlessly speak . not only do the wish of a piece of doughnut come true , the wish of peace come true . this young woman wish also to go to school . she go to school . this young woman wish for other thing to happen , it happen for she .     today , this young woman be I , a nobel laureate . I be now on a journey to fulfill the wish , in my tiny capacity , of little african girl — the wish of be educate . we set up a foundation . we be give full four - year scholarship to girl from village that we see with potential .     I do not have much to ask of you . I 've also be to place in this u.s . , and I know that girl in this country also have wish , a wish for a well life somewhere in the bronx , a wish for a well life somewhere in downtown l.a . , a wish for a well life somewhere in texas , a wish for a well life somewhere in new york , a wish for a well life somewhere in new jersey .     will you journey with I to help that girl , be it an african girl or an american girl or a japanese girl , fulfill her wish , fulfill her dream , achieve that dream ? because all of these great innovator and inventor that we 've talk to and see over the last few day be also sit in tiny corner in different part of the world , and all they be ask we to do be create that space to unlock the intelligence , unlock the passion , unlock all of the great thing that they hold within themselves . let us journey together . let us journey together .     thank you .     ( applause )     chris anderson : thank you so much . right now in liberia , what do you see as the main issue that trouble you ?     lg : I 've be ask to lead the liberian reconciliation initiative . as part of my work , I be do these tour in different village and town — 13 , 15 hour on dirt road — and there be no community that I 've go into that I have not see intelligent girl . but sadly , the vision of a great future , or the dream of a great future , be just a dream , because you have all of these vice . teen pregnancy , like I say , be epidemic .     so what trouble I be that I be at that place and somehow I be at this place , and I just do not want to be the only one at this place . I be look for way for other girl to be with I . I want to look back 20 year from now and see that there be another liberian girl , ghanaian girl , nigerian girl , ethiopian girl stand on this ted stage . and maybe , just maybe , say , " because of that nobel laureate I be here today . " so I be troubled when I see they like there be no hope . but I be also not pessimistic , because I know it do not take a lot to get they charge up .     can : and in the last year , tell we one hopeful thing that you 've see happen .     lg : I can tell you many hopeful thing that I 've see happen . but in the last year , where president sirleaf come from , her village , we go there to work with these girl . and we could not find 25 girl in high school . all of these girl go to the gold mine , and they be predominantly prostitute do other thing . we take 50 of those girl and we work with they . and this be at the beginning of election . this be one place where woman be never — even the old one barely sit in the circle with the man . these girl band together and form a group and launch a campaign for voter registration . this be a real rural village . and the theme they use be : " even pretty girl vote . " they be able to mobilize young woman .     but not only do they do that , they go to those who be run for seat to ask they , " what be it that you will give the girl of this community when you win ? " and one of the guy who already have a seat be very — because liberia have one of the strong rape law , and he be one of those really fight in parliament to overturn that law because he call it barbaric . rape be not barbaric , but the law , he say , be barbaric . and when the girl start engage he , he be very hostile towards they . these little girl turn to he and say , " we will vote you out of office . " he be out of office today .     ( applause )     can : leymah , thank you . thank you so much for come to ted .     lg : you be welcome . ( can : thank you . )     ( applause )  
   this may sound strange , but I be a big fan of the concrete block . the first concrete block be manufacture in 1868 with a very simple idea : module make of cement of a fix measurement that fit together . very quickly concrete block become the most - use construction unit in the world . they enable we to to build thing that be large than we , building , bridge , one brick at a time . essentially concrete block have become the building block of our time .     almost a hundred year later in 1947 , lego come up with this . it be call the automatic binding brick . and in a few short year , lego brick take place in every household . it be estimate that over 400 billion brick have be produce — or 75 brick for every person on the planet . you do not have to be an engineer to make beautiful house , beautiful bridge , beautiful building . lego make it accessible . lego have essentially take the concrete block , the building block of the world , and make it into the building block of our imagination .     meanwhile the exact same year , at bell lab the next revolution be about to be announce , the next building block . the transistor be a small plastic unit that would take we from a world of static brick pile on top of each other to a world where everything be interactive . like the concrete block , the transistor allow you to build much large , more complex circuit , one brick at a time .     but there be a main difference : the transistor be only for expert . I personally do not accept this , that the building block of our time be reserve for expert , so I decide to change that . eight year ago when I be at the medium lab , I start explore this idea of how to put the power of engineer in the hand of artist and designer .     a few year ago I start develop littlebit . let I show you how they work . littlebit be electronic module with each one specific function . they be pre - engineer to be light , sound , motor and sensor . and the good part about it be they snap together with magnet . so you can not put they the wrong way . the brick be color - code . green be output , blue be power , pink be input and orange be wire . so all you need to do be snap a blue to a green and very quickly you can start make large circuit . you put a blue to a green , you can make light . you can put a knob in between and now you 've make a little dimmer . switch out the knob for a pulse module , which be here , and now you 've make a little blinker . add this buzzer for some extra punch and you 've create a noise machine . I be go to stop that .     so beyond simple play , littlebit be actually pretty powerful . instead of have to program , to wire , to solder , littlebit allow you to program use very simple intuitive gesture . so to make this blink fast or slow , you would just turn this knob and basically make it pulse fast or slow . the idea behind littlebit be that it be a grow library . we want to make every single interaction in the world into a ready - to - use brick . light , sound , solar panel , motor — everything should be accessible .     we 've be give littlebit to kid and see they play with they . and it be be an incredible experience . the nice thing be how they start to understand the electronic around they from everyday that they do not learn at school . for example , how a nightlight work , or why an elevator door stay open , or how an ipod respond to touch . we 've also be take littlebit to design school . so for example , we 've have designer with no experience with electronic whatsoever start to play with littlebit as a material . here you see , with felt and paper water bottle , we have geordie make ...     ( clanging )     ( buzzing )     a few week ago we take littlebit to risd and give they to some designer with no experience in engineering whatsoever — just cardboard , wood and paper — and tell they " make something . " here be an example of a project they make , a motion - activate confetti canon ball . ( laughter ) but wait , this be actually my favorite project . it be a lobster make of playdough that be afraid of the dark .     ( laughter )     to these non - engineer , littlebit become another material , electronic become just another material . and we want to make this material accessible to everyone . so littlebit be open - source . you can go on the website , download all the design file , make they yourself . we want to encourage a world of creator , of inventor , of contributor , because this world that we live in , this interactive world , be ours . so go ahead and start invent .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   just a moment ago , my daughter rebecca texte I for good luck . her text say , " mom , you will rock . " I love this . get that text be like get a hug . and so there you have it . I embody the central paradox . I be a woman who love get text who be go to tell you that too many of they can be a problem .     actually that reminder of my daughter bring I to the beginning of my story . 1996 , when I give my first tedtalk , rebecca be five year old and she be sit right there in the front row . I have just write a book that celebrate our life on the internet and I be about to be on the cover of wired magazine . in those heady day , we be experiment with chat room and online virtual community . we be explore different aspect of ourselves . and then we unplug . I be excited . and , as a psychologist , what excite I most be the idea that we would use what we learn in the virtual world about ourselves , about our identity , to live well life in the real world .     now fast - forward to 2012 . I be back here on the ted stage again . my daughter 's 20 . she be a college student . she sleep with her cellphone , so do i. and I 've just write a new book , but this time it be not one that will get I on the cover of wired magazine . so what happen ? I be still excite by technology , but I believe , and I be here to make the case , that we be let it take we place that we do not want to go .     over the past 15 year , I 've study technology of mobile communication and I 've interview hundred and hundred of people , young and old , about their plug in life . and what I 've find be that our little device , those little device in our pocket , be so psychologically powerful that they do not only change what we do , they change who we be . some of the thing we do now with our device be thing that , only a few year ago , we would have find odd or disturbing , but they 've quickly come to seem familiar , just how we do thing .     so just to take some quick example : people text or do email during corporate board meeting . they text and shop and go on facebook during class , during presentation , actually during all meeting . people talk to I about the important new skill of make eye contact while you be texte . ( laughter ) people explain to I that it be hard , but that it can be do . parent text and do email at breakfast and at dinner while their child complain about not have their parent ' full attention . but then these same child deny each other their full attention . this be a recent shot of my daughter and her friend be together while not be together . and we even text at funeral . I study this . we remove ourselves from our grief or from our revery and we go into our phone .     why do this matter ? it matter to I because I think we be set ourselves up for trouble — trouble certainly in how we relate to each other , but also trouble in how we relate to ourselves and our capacity for self - reflection . we be getting use to a new way of be alone together . people want to be with each other , but also elsewhere — connect to all the different place they want to be . people want to customize their life . they want to go in and out of all the place they be because the thing that matter most to they be control over where they put their attention . so you want to go to that board meeting , but you only want to pay attention to the bit that interest you . and some people think that be a good thing . but you can end up hide from each other , even as we be all constantly connect to each other .     a 50 - year - old business man lament to I that he feel he do not have colleague anymore at work . when he go to work , he do not stop by to talk to anybody , he do not call . and he say he do not want to interrupt his colleague because , he say , " they be too busy on their email . " but then he stop himself and he say , " you know , I be not tell you the truth . I be the one who do not want to be interrupt . I think I should want to , but actually I would rather just do thing on my blackberry . "     across the generation , I see that people can not get enough of each other , if and only if they can have each other at a distance , in amount they can control . I call it the goldilock effect : not too close , not too far , just right . but what might feel just right for that middle - aged executive can be a problem for an adolescent who need to develop face - to - face relationship . an 18 - year - old boy who use texting for almost everything say to I wistfully , " someday , someday , but certainly not now , I would like to learn how to have a conversation . "     when I ask people " what be wrong with have a conversation ? " people say , " I 'll tell you what be wrong with have a conversation . it take place in real time and you can not control what you be go to say . " so that be the bottom line . texting , email , posting , all of these thing let we present the self as we want to be . we get to edit , and that mean we get to delete , and that mean we get to retouch , the face , the voice , the flesh , the body — not too little , not too much , just right .     human relationship be rich and they be messy and they be demand . and we clean they up with technology . and when we do , one of the thing that can happen be that we sacrifice conversation for mere connection . we short - change ourselves . and over time , we seem to forget this , or we seem to stop care .     I be catch off guard when stephen colbert ask I a profound question , a profound question . he say , " do not all those little tweet , do not all those little sip of online communication , add up to one big gulp of real conversation ? " my answer be no , they do not add up . connect in sip may work for gather discrete bit of information , they may work for say , " I be think about you , " or even for say , " I love you , " — I mean , look at how I feel when I get that text from my daughter — but they do not really work for learn about each other , for really come to know and understand each other . and we use conversation with each other to learn how to have conversation with ourselves . so a flight from conversation can really matter because it can compromise our capacity for self - reflection . for kid grow up , that skill be the bedrock of development .     over and over I hear , " I would rather text than talk . " and what I be see be that people get so use to be short - change out of real conversation , so use to get by with less , that they 've become almost willing to dispense with people altogether . so for example , many people share with I this wish , that some day a more advanced version of siri , the digital assistant on apple 's iphone , will be more like a good friend , someone who will listen when other will not . I believe this wish reflect a painful truth that I 've learn in the past 15 year . that feel that no one be listen to I be very important in our relationship with technology . that be why it be so appealing to have a facebook page or a twitter feed — so many automatic listener . and the feeling that no one be listen to I make we want to spend time with machine that seem to care about we .     we be develop robot , they call they sociable robot , that be specifically design to be companion — to the elderly , to our child , to we . have we so lose confidence that we will be there for each other ? during my research I work in nursing home , and I bring in these sociable robot that be design to give the elderly the feeling that they be understand . and one day I come in and a woman who have lose a child be talk to a robot in the shape of a baby seal . it seem to be look in her eye . it seem to be follow the conversation . it comfort she . and many people find this amazing .     but that woman be try to make sense of her life with a machine that have no experience of the arc of a human life . that robot put on a great show . and we be vulnerable . people experience pretend empathy as though it be the real thing . so during that moment when that woman be experience that pretend empathy , I be think , " that robot can not empathize . it do not face death . it do not know life . "     and as that woman take comfort in her robot companion , I do not find it amazing ; I find it one of the most wrenching , complicate moment in my 15 year of work . but when I step back , I feel myself at the cold , hard center of a perfect storm . we expect more from technology and less from each other . and I ask myself , " why have thing come to this ? "     and I believe it be because technology appeal to we most where we be most vulnerable . and we be vulnerable . we be lonely , but we be afraid of intimacy . and so from social network to sociable robot , we be design technology that will give we the illusion of companionship without the demand of friendship . we turn to technology to help we feel connect in way we can comfortably control . but we be not so comfortable . we be not so much in control .     these day , those phone in our pocket be change our mind and heart because they offer we three gratify fantasy . one , that we can put our attention wherever we want it to be ; two , that we will always be hear ; and three , that we will never have to be alone . and that third idea , that we will never have to be alone , be central to change our psyche . because the moment that people be alone , even for a few second , they become anxious , they panic , they fidget , they reach for a device . just think of people at a checkout line or at a red light . be alone feel like a problem that need to be solve . and so people try to solve it by connect . but here , connection be more like a symptom than a cure . it express , but it do not solve , an underlie problem . but more than a symptom , constant connection be change the way people think of themselves . it be shape a new way of be .     the good way to describe it be , I share therefore I be . we use technology to define ourselves by share our thought and feeling even as we be have they . so before it be : I have a feeling , I want to make a call . now it be : I want to have a feeling , I need to send a text . the problem with this new regime of " I share therefore I be " be that , if we do not have connection , we do not feel like ourselves . we almost do not feel ourselves . so what do we do ? we connect more and more . but in the process , we set ourselves up to be isolate .     how do you get from connection to isolation ? you end up isolated if you do not cultivate the capacity for solitude , the ability to be separate , to gather yourself . solitude be where you find yourself so that you can reach out to other people and form real attachment . when we do not have the capacity for solitude , we turn to other people in order to feel less anxious or in order to feel alive . when this happen , we be not able to appreciate who they be . it be as though we be use they as spare part to support our fragile sense of self . we slip into thinking that always be connect be go to make we feel less alone . but we be at risk , because actually it be the opposite that be true . if we be not able to be alone , we be go to be more lonely . and if we do not teach our child to be alone , they be only go to know how to be lonely .     when I speak at ted in 1996 , report on my study of the early virtual community , I say , " those who make the most of their life on the screen come to it in a spirit of self - reflection . " and that be what I be call for here , now : reflection and , more than that , a conversation about where our current use of technology may be take we , what it might be cost we . we be smite with technology . and we be afraid , like young lover , that too much talk might spoil the romance . but it be time to talk . we grow up with digital technology and so we see it as all grow up . but it be not , it be early day . there be plenty of time for we to reconsider how we use it , how we build it . I be not suggest that we turn away from our device , just that we develop a more self - aware relationship with they , with each other and with ourselves .     I see some first step . start think of solitude as a good thing . make room for it . find way to demonstrate this as a value to your child . create sacred space at home — the kitchen , the dining room — and reclaim they for conversation . do the same thing at work . at work , we be so busy communicate that we often do not have time to think , we do not have time to talk , about the thing that really matter . change that . most important , we all really need to listen to each other , include to the boring bit . because it be when we stumble or hesitate or lose our word that we reveal ourselves to each other .     technology be make a bid to redefine human connection — how we care for each other , how we care for ourselves — but it be also give we the opportunity to affirm our value and our direction . I be optimistic . we have everything we need to start . we have each other . and we have the great chance of success if we recognize our vulnerability . that we listen when technology say it will take something complicated and promise something simple .     so in my work , I hear that life be hard , relationship be fill with risk . and then there be technology — simple , hopeful , optimistic , ever - young . it be like call in the cavalry . an ad campaign promise that online and with avatar , you can " finally , love your friend love your body , love your life , online and with avatar . " we be draw to virtual romance , to computer game that seem like world , to the idea that robot , robot , will someday be our true companion . we spend an evening on the social network instead of go to the pub with friend .     but our fantasy of substitution have cost we . now we all need to focus on the many , many way technology can lead we back to our real life , our own body , our own community , our own politic , our own planet . they need we . let us talk about how we can use digital technology , the technology of our dream , to make this life the life we can love .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I call myself a body architect . I train in classical ballet and have a background in architecture and fashion . as a body architect , I fascinate with the human body and explore how I can transform it .     I work at philip electronic in the far - future design research lab , look 20 year into the future . I explore the human skin , and how technology can transform the body . I work on concept like an electronic tattoo , which be augment by touch , or dress that blush and shiver with light . I start my own experiment . these be the low - tech approach to the high - tech conversation I be have . these be q - tip stick to my roommate with wig glue .     ( laughter )     I start a collaboration with a friend of mine , bart hess — he do not normally look like this — and we use ourselves as model . we transform our apartment into our laboratory , and work in a very spontaneous and immediate way . we be create visual imagery provoke human evolution .     whilst I be at philip , we discuss this idea of a maybe technology , something that be not either switch on or off , but in between . a maybe that could take the form of a gas or a liquid . and I become obsessed with this idea of blur the perimeter of the body , so you could not see where the skin end and the near environment start . I set up my studio in the red - light district and obsessively wrap myself in plumbing tubing , and find a way to redefine the skin and create this dynamic textile . I be introduce to robyn , the swedish pop star , and she be also explore how technology coexist with raw human emotion . and she talk about how technology with these new feather , this new face paint , this punk , the way that we identify with the world , and we make this music video .     I be fascinated with the idea of what happen when you merge biology with technology , and I remember read about this idea of be able to reprogram biology , in the future , away from disease and aging . and I think about this concept of , imagine if we could reprogram our own body odor , modify and biologically enhance it , and how would that change the way that we communicate with each other ? or the way that we attract sexual partner ? and would we revert back to be more like animal , more primal mode of communication ? I work with a synthetic biologist , and I create a swallowable perfume , which be a cosmetic pill that you eat and the fragrance come out through the skin 's surface when you perspire . it completely blow apart the way that perfume be , and provide a whole new format . it be perfume come from the inside out . it redefine the role of skin , and our body become an atomizer .     I 've learn that there be no boundary , and if I look at the evolution of my work I can see thread and connection that make sense . but when I look towards the future , the next project be completely unknown and wide open . I feel like I have all these idea exist embed inside of I , and it be these conversation and these experience that connect these idea , and they kind of instinctively come out .     as a body architect , I 've create this limitless and boundless platform for I to discover whatever I want . and I feel like I 've just got start .     so here be to another day at the office .     ( laughter ) ( applause )     thank you !     thank you !  
   if you have catch I straight out of college in the hall of the vermont state house where I be a lobbyist in training and ask I what I be go to do with my life , I would have tell you that I would just pass the hanyu shuiping kaoshi , the chinese equivalency exam , and I be go to go study law in beijing , and I be go to improve u.s.-china relation through top - down policy change and judicial system reform . ( laughter ) ( applause ) I have a plan , and I never ever think it would have anything to do with the banjo .     little do I know what a huge impact it would have on I one night when I be at a party and I hear a sound come out of a record player in the corner of a room . and it be doc watson singe and play " shady grove . " ♫ shady grove , my little love ♫ ♫ shady grove , my darlin ' ♫ ♫ shady grove , my little love ♫ ♫ go back to harlan ♫ that sound be just so beautiful , the sound of doc 's voice and the ripple groove of the banjo . and after be totally and completely obsess with the mammoth richness and history of chinese culture , it be like this total relief to hear something so truly american and so truly awesome . I know I have to take a banjo with I to china .     so before go to law school in china I buy a banjo , I throw it in my little red truck and I travel down through appalachia and I learn a bunch of old american song , and I end up in kentucky at the international bluegrass music association convention . and I be sit in a hallway one night and a couple girl come up to I . and they say , " hey , do you want to jam ? " and I be like , " sure . " so I pick up my banjo and I nervously play four song that I actually know with they . and a record executive walk up to I and invite I to nashville , tennessee to make a record .     ( laughter )     it be be eight year , and I can tell you that I do not go to china to become a lawyer . in fact , I go to nashville . and after a few month I be write song . and the first song I write be in english , and the second one be in chinese .     ( music )     [ chinese ]     outside your door the world be wait . inside your heart a voice be call . the four corner of the world be watch , so travel daughter , travel . go get it , girl .     ( applause )     it be really be eight year since that fate night in kentucky . and I 've play thousand of show . and I 've collaborate with so many incredible , inspirational musician around the world . and I see the power of music . I see the power of music to connect culture . I see it when I stand on a stage in a bluegrass festival in east virginia and I look out at the sea of lawn chair and I bust out into a song in chinese . [ chinese ] and everybody 's eye just pop wide open like it be go to fall out of their head . and they be like , " what be that girl do ? " and then they come up to I after the show and you all have a story . you all come up and they be like , " you know , my aunt 's sister 's babysitter 's dog 's chicken go to china and adopt a girl . " and I tell you what , it like everybody be get a story . it be just incredible . and then I go to china and I stand on a stage at a university and I bust out into a song in chinese and everybody sing along and they roar with delight at this girl with the hair and the instrument , and she be singe their music .     and I see , even more importantly , the power of music to connect heart . like the time I be in sichuan province and I be singe for kid in relocation school in the earthquake disaster zone . and this little girl come up to I . [ chinese ] " big sister wong , " washburn , wong , same difference . " big sister wong , can I sing you a song that my mom sing for I before she be swallow in the earthquake ? " and I sit down , she sit on my lap . she start singe her song . and the warmth of her body and the tear roll down her rosy cheek , and I start to cry . and the light that shine off of her eye be a place I could have stay forever .     and in that moment , we be not our american self , we be not our chinese self , we be just mortal sit together in that light that keep we here . I want to dwell in that light with you and with everyone . and I know u.s.-china relation do not need another lawyer .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   have you ever wonder what be inside your dental plaque ? probably not , but people like I do . I be an archeological geneticist at the center for evolutionary medicine at the university of zurich , and I study the origin and evolution of human health and disease by conduct genetic research on the skeletal and mummify remain of ancient human . and through this work , I hope to well understand the evolutionary vulnerability of our body , so that we can improve and well manage our health in the future .     there be different way to approach evolutionary medicine , and one way be to extract human dna from ancient bone . and from these extract , we can reconstruct the human genome at different point in time and look for change that might be relate to adaptation , risk factor and inherit disease . but this be only one half of the story .     the most important health challenge today be not cause by simple mutation in our genome , but rather result from a complex and dynamic interplay between genetic variation , diet , microbe and parasite and our immune response . all of these disease have a strong evolutionary component that directly relate to the fact that we live today in a very different environment than the one in which our body evolve . and in order to understand these disease , we need to move past study of the human genome alone and towards a more holistic approach to human health in the past .     but there be a lot of challenge for this . and first of all , what do we even study ? skeleton be ubiquitous ; they be find all over the place . but of course , all of the soft tissue have decompose , and the skeleton itself have limit health information . mummy be a great source of information , except that they be really geographically limited and limit in time as well . coprolite be fossilize human fece , and they be actually extremely interesting . you can learn a lot about ancient diet and intestinal disease , but they be very rare .     ( laughter )     so to address this problem , I put together a team of international researcher in switzerland , denmark and the u.k . to study a very poorly study , little know material that be find on people everywhere . it be a type of fossilized dental plaque that be call officially dental calculus . many of you may know it by the term tartar . it be what the dentist clean off your tooth every time that you go in for a visit . and in a typical dentistry visit , you may have about 15 to 30 milligram remove . but in ancient time before tooth brushing , up to 600 milligram might have build up on the tooth over a lifetime .     and what be really important about dental calculus be that it fossilize just like the rest of the skeleton , it be abundant in quantity before the present day and it be ubiquitous worldwide . we find it in every population around the world at all time period go back ten of thousand of year . and we even find it in neanderthal and animal .     and so previous study have only focus on microscopy . they have look at dental calculus under a microscope , and what they have find be thing like pollen and plant starch , and they would find muscle cell from animal meat and bacteria . and so what my team of researcher , what we want to do , be say , can we apply genetic and proteomic technology to go after dna and protein , and from this can we get well taxonomic resolution to really understand what be go on ?     and what we find be that we can find many commensal and pathogenic bacteria that inhabit the nasal passage and mouth . we also have find immune protein relate to infection and inflammation and protein and dna relate to diet . but what be surprising to we , and also quite exciting , be we also find bacteria that normally inhabit upper respiratory system . so it give we virtual access to the lung , which be where many important disease reside .     and we also find bacteria that normally inhabit the gut . and so we can also now virtually gain access to this even more distant organ system that , from the skeleton alone , have long decompose . and so by apply ancient dna sequence and protein mass spectrometry technology to ancient dental calculus , we can generate immense quantity of datum that then we can use to begin to reconstruct a detailed picture of the dynamic interplay between diet , infection and immunity thousand of year ago .     so what start out as an idea , be now be implement to churn out million of sequence that we can use to investigate the long - term evolutionary history of human health and disease , right down to the genetic code of individual pathogen . and from this information we can learn about how pathogen evolve and also why they continue to make we sick . and I hope I have convince you of the value of dental calculus .     and as a final parting think , on behalf of future archeologist , I would like to ask you to please think twice before you go home and brush your tooth .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   to most of you , this be a device to buy , sell , play game , watch video . I think it might be a lifeline . I think actually it might be able to save more life than penicillin .     texting : I know I say texting and a lot of you think sexte , a lot of you think about the lewd photo that you see — hopefully not your kid send to somebody else — or try to translate the abbreviation lol , lmao , hmu . I can help you with those later . but the parent in the room know that texting be actually the good way to communicate with your kid . it might be the only way to communicate with your kid . ( laughter ) the average teenager send 3,339 text message a month , unless she be a girl , then it be close to 4,000 . and the secret be she open every single one . texting have a 100 percent open rate . now the parent be really alarmed . it be a 100 percent open rate even if she do not respond to you when you ask she when she be come home for dinner . I promise she read that text . and this be not some suburban iphone - use teen phenomenon . texte actually overindexe for minority and urban youth . I know this because at dosomething.org , which be the large organization for teenager and social change in america , about six month ago we pivot and start focus on text messaging . we be now texte out to about 200,000 kid a week about do our campaign to make their school more green or to work on homeless issue and thing like that . we be find it 11 time more powerful than email . we 've also find an unintended consequence . we 've be get text message back like these . " I do not want to go to school today . the boy call I faggot . " " I be cut , my parent find out , and so I stop . but I just start again an hour ago . " or , " he will not stop rape I . he tell I not to tell anyone . it be my dad . be you there ? " that last one be an actual text message that we receive . and yeah , we be there . I will not forget the day we get that text message . and so it be that day that we decide we need to build a crisis text hotline . because this be not what we do . we do social change . kid be just send we these text message because texting be so familiar and comfortable to they and there be nowhere else to turn that they be send they to we . so think about it , a text hotline ; it be pretty powerful . it be fast , it be pretty private . no one hear you in a stall , you be just texte quietly . it be real time . we can help million of teen with counseling and referral . that be great . but the thing that really make this awesome be the data . because I be not really comfortable just help that girl with counseling and referral . I want to prevent this shit from happen . so think about a cop . there be something in new york city . the police do it . it use to be just guess work , police work . and then they start crime mapping . and so they start follow and watch petty theft , summons , all kind of thing — chart the future essentially . and they find thing like , when you see crystal meth on the street , if you add police presence , you can curb the otherwise inevitable spate of assault and robbery that would happen . in fact , the year after the nypd put compstat in place , the murder rate fall 60 percent . so think about the datum from a crisis text line . there be no census on bully and date abuse and eat disorder and cutting and rape — no census . maybe there be some study , some longitudinal study , that cost lot of money and take lot of time . or maybe there be some anecdotal evidence . imagine have real time datum on every one of those issue . you could inform legislation . you could inform school policy . you could say to a principal , " you be have a problem every thursday at three o'clock . what be go on in your school ? " you could see the immediate impact of legislation or a hateful speech that somebody give in a school assembly and see what happen as a result . this be really , to I , the power of texting and the power of datum . because while people be talk about datum , make it possible for facebook to mine my friend from the third grade , or target to know when it be time for I to buy more diaper , or some dude to build a well baseball team , I be actually really excited about the power of datum and the power of texting to help that kid go to school , to help that girl stop cut in the bathroom and absolutely to help that girl whose father 's rape she . thank you . ( applause )  
   we conventionally divide space into private and public realm , and we know these legal distinction very well because we 've become expert at protect our private property and private space . but we be less attuned to the nuance of the public . what translate generic public space into qualitative space ? I mean , this be something that our studio have be work on for the past decade . and we be do this through some case study .     a large chunk of our work have be put into transform this neglect industrial ruin into a viable post - industrial space that look forward and backward at the same time . and another huge chunk of our work have go into make relevant a site that be grow out of sync with its time . we 've be work on democratize lincoln center for a public that do not usually have $ 300 to spend on an opera ticket . so we 've be eat , drinking , thinking , live public space for quite a long time . and it be teach we really one thing , and that be to truly make good public space , you have to erase the distinction between architecture , urbanism , landscape , medium design and so on . it really go beyond distinction .     now we be move onto washington , d.c . and we be work on another transformation , and that be for the exist hirshhorn museum that be site on the most revered public space in america , the national mall . the mall be a symbol of american democracy . and what be fantastic be that this symbol be not a thing , it be not an image , it be not an artifact , actually it be a space , and it be kind of just define by a line of building on either side .     it be a space where citizen can voice their discontent and show their power . it be a place where pivotal moment in american history have take place . and they be inscribe in there forever — like the march on washington for job and freedom and the great speech that martin luther king give there . the vietnam protest , the commemoration of all that die in the pandemic of aids , the march for woman 's reproductive right , right up until almost the present . the mall be the great civic stage in this country for dissent . and it be synonymous with free speech , even if you be not sure what it be that you have to say . it may just be a place for civic commiseration .     there be a huge disconnect , we believe , between the communicative and discursive space of the mall and the museum that line it to either side . and that be that those museum be usually passive , they have passive relationship between the museum as the presenter and the audience , as the receiver of information . and so you can see dinosaur and insect and collection of locomotive and all of that , but you be really not involve ; you be be talk to .     when richard koshalek take over as director of the hirshhorn in 2009 , he be determined to take advantage of the fact that this museum be site at the most unique place : at the seat of power in the u.s . and while art and politic be inherently and implicitly together always and all the time , there could be some very special relationship that could be forge here in its uniqueness .     the question be , be it possible ultimately for art to insert itself into the dialogue of national and world affair ? and could the museum be an agent of cultural diplomacy ? there be over 180 embassy in washington d.c . there be over 500 think tank . there should be a way of harness all of that intellectual and global energy into , and somehow through , the museum . there should be some kind of brain trust .     so the hirshhorn , as we begin to think about it , and as we evolve the mission , with richard and his team — it be really his life blood . but beyond exhibit contemporary art , the hirshhorn will become a public forum , a place of discourse for issue around art , culture , politic and policy . it would have the global reach of the world economic forum . it would have the interdisciplinarity of the ted conference . it would have the informality of the town square . and for this new initiative , the hirshhorn would have to expand or appropriate a site for a contemporary , deployable structure .     this be it . this be the hirshhorn — so a 230 - foot - diameter concrete doughnut design in the early ' 70 by gordon bunshaft . it be hulk , it be silent , it be cloister , it be arrogant , it be a design challenge . architect love to hate it . one redeem feature be it be lift up off the ground and it be get this void , and it be get an empty core kind of in the spirit and that facade very much corporate and federal style .     and around that space , the ring be actually gallery . very , very difficult to mount show in there . when the hirshhorn open , ada louise huxstable , the new york times critic , have some choice word : " neo - penitentiary modern . " " a maim monument and a maim mall for a maimed collection . "     almost four decade later , how will this building expand for a new progressive program ? where would it go ? it can not go in the mall . there be no space there . it can not go in the courtyard . it be already take up by landscape and by sculpture . well there be always the hole . but how could it take the space of that hole and not be bury in it invisibly ? how could it become iconic ? and what language would it take ?     the hirshhorn sit among the mall 's monumental institution . most be neoclassical , heavy and opaque , make of stone or concrete . and the question be , if one inhabit that space , what be the material of the mall ? it have to be different from the building there . it have to be something entirely different . it have to be air . in our imagination , it have to be light . it have to be ephemeral . it have to be formless . and it have to be free .     ( video )     so this be the big idea . it be a giant airbag . the expansion take the shape of its container and it ooze out wherever it can — the top and side . but more poetically , we like to think of the structure as inhale the democratic air of the mall , bring it into itself . the before and the after .     it be dub " the bubble " by the press . that be the lounge . it be basically one big volume of air that just ooze out in every direction . the membrane be translucent . it be make of silcon - coat glass fiber . and it be inflate twice a year for one month at a time .     this be the view from the inside . so you might have be wonder how in the world do we get this approve by the federal government . it have to be approve by actually two agency . and one be there to preserve the dignity and sanctity of the mall . I blush whenever I show this . it be yours to interpret .     but one thing I can say be that it be a combination of iconoclasm and adoration . there be also some creative interpretation involve . the congressional building act of 1910 limit the height of building in d.c . to 130 foot , except for spire , tower , dome and minaret . this pretty much exempt monument of the church and state . and the bubble be 153 ft . that be the pantheon next to it . it be about 1.2 million cubic foot of compressed air . and so we argue it on the merit of be a dome .     so there it be , very stately , among all the stately building in the mall . and while this hirshhorn be not landmarke , it be very , very historically sensitive . and so we could not really touch its surface . we could not leave any trace behind . so we strain it from the edge , and we hold it by cable . it be a study of some bondage technique , which be actually very important because it be hit by wind all the time . there be one permanent steel ring at the top , but it can not be see from any vantage point on the mall .     there be also some restriction about how much it could be light . it glow from within , it be translucent . but it can not be more light than the capitol or some of the monument . so it be down the hierarchy on lighting .     so it come to the site twice a year . it be take off the delivery truck . it be hoist . and then it be inflate with this low - pressure air . and then it be restrain with the cable . and then it be ballasted with water at the very bottom .     this be a very strange moment where we be ask by the bureaucracy at the mall how much time would it take to install . and we say , well the first erection would take one week . and they really connect with that idea . and then it be really you all the way through . so we do not really have that many hurdle , I have to say , with the government and all the authority .     but some of the tough hurdle have be the technical one . this be the warp and weft . this be a point cloud . there be extreme pressure . this be a very , very unusual building in that there be no gravity load , but there be load in every direction .     and I be just go to zip through these slide . and this be the space in action . so flexible interior for discussion , just like this , but in the round — luminous and reconfigurable . could be use for anything , for performance , film , for installation . and the very first program will be one of cultural dialogue and diplomacy organize in partnership with the council on foreign relation .     form and content be together here . the bubble be an anti - monument . the ideal of participatory democracy be represent through suppleness rather than rigidity .     art and politic occupy an ambiguous site outside the museum wall , but inside of the museum 's core , blend its air with the democratic air of the mall . and the bubble will inflate hopefully for the first time at the end of 2013 .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be a very lucky person . I 've be privileged to see so much of our beautiful earth and the people and creature that live on it . and my passion be inspire at the age of seven , when my parent first take I to morocco , at the edge of the sahara desert . now imagine a little brit somewhere that be not cold and damp like home . what an amazing experience . and it make I want to explore more .     so as a filmmaker , I 've be from one end of the earth to the other try to get the perfect shot and to capture animal behavior never see before . and what be more , I be really lucky , because I get to share that with million of people worldwide . now the idea of have new perspective of our planet and actually be able to get that message out get I out of bed every day with a spring in my step .     you might think that it be quite hard to find new story and new subject , but new technology be change the way we can film . it be enable we to get fresh , new image and tell brand new story . in nature 's great event , a series for the bbc that I do with david attenborough , we want to do just that .     image of grizzly bear be pretty familiar . you see they all the time , you think . but there be a whole side to their life that we hardly ever see and have never be film . so what we do , we go to alaska , which be where the grizzly rely on really high , almost inaccessible , mountain slope for their denning . and the only way to film that be a shoot from the air .     ( video ) david attenborough : throughout alaska and british columbia , thousand of bear family be emerge from their winter sleep . there be nothing to eat up here , but the condition be ideal for hibernation . lot of snow in which to dig a den . to find food , mother must lead their cub down to the coast , where the snow will already be melt . but get down can be a challenge for small cub . these mountain be dangerous place , but ultimately the fate of these bear family , and indeed that of all bear around the north pacific , depend on the salmon .     kb : I love that shot . I always get goosebump every time I see it . that be film from a helicopter use a gyro - stabilize camera . and it be a wonderful bit of gear , because it be like have a fly tripod , crane and you all roll into one . but technology alone be not enough . to really get the money shot , it be down to be in the right place at the right time . and that sequence be especially difficult .     the first year we get nothing . we have to go back the following year , all the way back to the remote part of alaska . and we hang around with a helicopter for two whole week . and eventually we get lucky . the cloud lift , the wind be still , and even the bear show up . and we manage to get that magic moment .     for a filmmaker , new technology be an amazing tool , but the other thing that really , really excite I be when new specie be discover . now , when I hear about one animal , I know we have to get it for my next series , untamed america , for national geographic . in 2005 , a new specie of bat be discover in the cloud forest of ecuador . and what be amazing about that discovery be that it also solve the mystery of what pollinate a unique flower . it depend solely on the bat .     now , the series have not even air yet , so you be the very first to see this . see what you think . ( video ) narrator : the tube - lip nectar bat . a pool of delicious nectar lie at the bottom of each flower 's long flute . but how to reach it ? necessity be the mother of evolution . ( music ) this two - and - a - half - inch bat have a three - and - a - half - inch tongue , the long relative to body length of any mammal in the world . if human , he would have a nine - foot tongue . ( applause ) kb : what a tongue . we film it by cut a tiny little hole in the base of the flower and use a camera that could slow the action by 40 time . so imagine how quick that thing be in real life .     now people often ask I , " where be your favorite place on the planet ? " and the truth be I just do not have one . there be so many wonderful place . but some location draw you back time and time again . and one remote location — I first go there as a backpacker ; I 've be back several time for film , most recently for untamed america — it be the altiplano in the high ande of south america , and it be the most otherworldly place I know . but at 15,000 foot , it be tough . it be freeze cold , and that thin air really get you . sometimes it be hard to breathe , especially you all the heavy film equipment . and that pound head just feel like a constant hangover . but the advantage of that wonderful thin atmosphere be that it enable you to see the star in the heaven with amazing clarity . have a look .     ( video ) narrator : some 1,500 mile south of the tropic , between chile and bolivia , the ande completely change . it be call the altiplano , or " high plain " — a place of extreme and extreme contrast . where desert freeze and water boil . more like mar than earth , it seem just as hostile to life . the star themselves — at 12,000 foot , the dry , thin air make for perfect stargazing . some of the world 's astronomer have telescope nearby . but just look up with the naked eye , you really do not need one . ( music ) ( applause )     kb : thank you so much for let I share some image of our magnificent , wonderful earth . thank you for let I share that with you . ( applause )  
   I be go to talk to you about optimism — or more precisely , the optimism bias . it be a cognitive illusion that we 've be study in my lab for the past few year , and 80 percent of we have it .     it be our tendency to overestimate our likelihood of experience good event in our life and underestimate our likelihood of experience bad event . so we underestimate our likelihood of suffer from cancer , be in a car accident . we overestimate our longevity , our career prospect . in short , we be more optimistic than realistic , but we be oblivious to the fact .     take marriage for example . in the western world , divorce rate be about 40 percent . that mean that out of five married couple , two will end up split their asset . but when you ask newlywed about their own likelihood of divorce , they estimate it at zero percent . and even divorce lawyer , who should really know well , hugely underestimate their own likelihood of divorce . so it turn out that optimist be not less likely to divorce , but they be more likely to remarry . in the word of samuel johnson , " remarriage be the triumph of hope over experience . "     ( laughter )     so if we be marry , we be more likely to have kid . and we all think our kid will be especially talented . this , by the way , be my two - year - old nephew , guy . and I just want to make it absolutely clear that he be a really bad example of the optimism bias , because he be in fact uniquely talented .     ( laughter )     and I be not alone . out of four british people , three say that they be optimistic about the future of their own family . that be 75 percent . but only 30 percent say that they think family in general be do well than a few generation ago .     and this be a really important point , because we be optimistic about ourselves , we be optimistic about our kid , we be optimistic about our family , but we be not so optimistic about the guy sit next to we , and we be somewhat pessimistic about the fate of our fellow citizen and the fate of our country . but private optimism about our own personal future remain persistent . and it do not mean that we think thing will magically turn out okay , but rather that we have the unique ability to make it so .     now I be a scientist , I do experiment . so to show you what I mean , I be go to do an experiment here with you . so I be go to give you a list of ability and characteristic , and I want you to think for each of these ability where you stand relative to the rest of the population .     the first one be get along well with other . who here believe they be at the bottom 25 percent ? okay , that be about 10 people out of 1,500 . who believe they be at the top 25 percent ? that be most of we here . okay , now do the same for your driving ability . how interesting be you ? how attractive be you ? how honest be you ? and finally , how modest be you ?     so most of we put ourselves above average on most of these ability . now this be statistically impossible . we can not all be well than everyone else . ( laughter ) but if we believe we be well than the other guy , well that mean that we be more likely to get that promotion , to remain married , because we be more social , more interesting .     and it be a global phenomenon . the optimism bias have be observe in many different country — in western culture , in non - western culture , in female and male , in kid , in the elderly . it be quite widespread .     but the question be , be it good for we ? so some people say no . some people say the secret to happiness be low expectation . I think the logic go something like this : if we do not expect greatness , if we do not expect to find love and be healthy and successful , well we be not go to be disappoint when these thing do not happen . and if we be not disappointed when good thing do not happen , and we be pleasantly surprised when they do , we will be happy .     so it be a very good theory , but it turn out to be wrong for three reason . number one : whatever happen , whether you succeed or you fail , people with high expectation always feel well . because how we feel when we get dump or win employee of the month depend on how we interpret that event .     the psychologist margaret marshall and john brown study student with high and low expectation . and they find that when people with high expectation succeed , they attribute that success to their own trait . " I be a genius , therefore I get an a , therefore I 'll get an a again and again in the future . " when they fail , it be not because they be dumb , but because the exam just happen to be unfair . next time they will do well . people with low expectation do the opposite . so when they fail it be because they be dumb , and when they succeed it be because the exam just happen to be really easy . next time reality would catch up with they . so they feel bad .     number two : regardless of the outcome , the pure act of anticipation make we happy . the behavioral economist george lowenstein ask student in his university to imagine get a passionate kiss from a celebrity , any celebrity . then he say , " how much be you willing to pay to get a kiss from a celebrity if the kiss be deliver immediately , in three hour , in 24 hour , in three day , in one year , in 10 year ? he find that the student be willing to pay the most not to get a kiss immediately , but to get a kiss in three day . they be willing to pay extra in order to wait . now they be not willing to wait a year or 10 year ; no one want an age celebrity . but three day seem to be the optimum amount .     so why be that ? well if you get the kiss now , it be over and do with . but if you get the kiss in three day , well that be three day of jittery anticipation , the thrill of the wait . the student want that time to imagine where be it go to happen , how be it go to happen . anticipation make they happy .     this be , by the way , why people prefer friday to sunday . it be a really curious fact , because friday be a day of work and sunday be a day of pleasure , so you would assume that people will prefer sunday , but they do not . it be not because they really , really like be in the office and they can not stand stroll in the park or have a lazy brunch . we know that , because when you ask people about their ultimate favorite day of the week , surprise , surprise , saturday come in at first , then friday , then sunday . people prefer friday because friday bring with it the anticipation of the weekend ahead , all the plan that you have . on sunday , the only thing you can look forward to be the work week .     so optimist be people who expect more kiss in their future , more stroll in the park . and that anticipation enhance their wellbeing . in fact , without the optimism bias , we would all be slightly depressed . people with mild depression , they do not have a bias when they look into the future . they be actually more realistic than healthy individual . but individual with severe depression , they have a pessimistic bias . so they tend to expect the future to be bad than it end up be .     so optimism change subjective reality . the way we expect the world to be change the way we see it . but it also change objective reality . it act as a self - fulfil prophecy . and that be the third reason why lower your expectation will not make you happy . control experiment have show that optimism be not only relate to success , it lead to success . optimism lead to success in academia and sport and politic . and maybe the most surprising benefit of optimism be health . if we expect the future to be bright , stress and anxiety be reduce .     so all in all , optimism have lot of benefit . but the question that be really confusing to I be , how do we maintain optimism in the face of reality ? as an neuroscientist , this be especially confusing , because accord to all the theory out there , when your expectation be not meet , you should alter they . but this be not what we find . we ask people to come into our lab in order to try and figure out what be go on .     we ask they to estimate their likelihood of experience different terrible event in their life . so , for example , what be your likelihood of suffer from cancer ? and then we tell they the average likelihood of someone like they to suffer these misfortune . so cancer , for example , be about 30 percent . and then we ask they again , " how likely be you to suffer from cancer ? "     what we want to know be whether people will take the information that we give they to change their belief . and indeed they do — but mostly when the information we give they be well than what they expect . so for example , if someone say , " my likelihood of suffer from cancer be about 50 percent , " and we say , " hey , good news . the average likelihood be only 30 percent , " the next time around they would say , " well maybe my likelihood be about 35 percent . " so they learn quickly and efficiently . but if someone start off say , " my average likelihood of suffering from cancer be about 10 percent , " and we say , " hey , bad news . the average likelihood be about 30 percent , " the next time around they would say , " yep . still think it be about 11 percent . "     ( laughter )     so it be not that they do not learn at all — they do — but much , much less than when we give they positive information about the future . and it be not that they do not remember the number that we give they ; everyone remember that the average likelihood of cancer be about 30 percent and the average likelihood of divorce be about 40 percent . but they do not think that those number be relate to they .     what this mean be that warning sign such as these may only have limit impact . yes , smoking kill , but mostly it kill the other guy .     what I want to know be what be go on inside the human brain that prevent we from take these warning sign personally . but at the same time , when we hear that the housing market be hopeful , we think , " oh , my house be definitely go to double in price . " to try and figure that out , I ask the participant in the experiment to lie in a brain imaging scanner . it look like this . and use a method call functional mri , we be able to identify region in the brain that be respond to positive information .     one of these region be call the left inferior frontal gyrus . so if someone say , " my likelihood of suffer from cancer be 50 percent , " and we say , " hey , good news . average likelihood be 30 percent , " the left inferior frontal gyrus would respond fiercely . and it do not matter if you be an extreme optimist , a mild optimist or slightly pessimistic , everyone 's leave inferior frontal gyrus be function perfectly well , whether you be barack obama or woody allen .     on the other side of the brain , the right inferior frontal gyrus be respond to bad news . and here be the thing : it be not do a very good job . the more optimistic you be , the less likely this region be to respond to unexpected negative information . and if your brain be fail at integrate bad news about the future , you will constantly leave your rose - tint spectacle on .     so we want to know , could we change this ? could we alter people 's optimism bias by interfere with the brain activity in these region ? and there be a way for we to do that .     this be my collaborator ryota kanai . and what he be do be he be pass a small magnetic pulse through the skull of the participant in our study into their inferior frontal gyrus . and by do that , he be interfere with the activity of this brain region for about half an hour . after that everything go back to normal , I assure you .     ( laughter )     so let us see what happen . first of all , I be go to show you the average amount of bias that we see . so if I be to test all of you now , this be the amount that you would learn more from good news relative to bad news . now we interfere with the region that we find to integrate negative information in this task , and the optimism bias grow even large . we make people more biased in the way that they process information . then we interfere with the brain region that we find to integrate good news in this task , and the optimism bias disappear . we be quite amazed by these result because we be able to eliminate a deep - root bias in human .     and at this point we stop and we ask ourselves , would we want to shatter the optimism illusion into tiny little bit ? if we could do that , would we want to take people 's optimism bias away ? well I 've already tell you about all of the benefit of the optimism bias , which probably make you want to hold onto it for dear life . but there be , of course , pitfall , and it would be really foolish of we to ignore they .     take for example this email I recieve from a firefighter here in california . he say , " fatality investigation for firefighter often include ' we do not think the fire be go to do that , ' even when all of the available information be there to make safe decision . " this captain be go to use our finding on the optimism bias to try to explain to the firefighter why they think the way they do , to make they acutely aware of this very optimistic bias in human .     so unrealistic optimism can lead to risky behavior , to financial collapse , to faulty planning . the british government , for example , have acknowledge that the optimism bias can make individual more likely to underestimate the cost and duration of project . so they have adjust the 2012 olympic budget for the optimism bias .     my friend who be getting marry in a few week have do the same for his wedding budget . and by the way , when I ask he about his own likelihood of divorce , he say he be quite sure it be zero percent .     so what we would really like to do , be we would like to protect ourselves from the danger of optimism , but at the same time remain hopeful , benefit from the many fruit of optimism . and I believe there be a way for we to do that . the key here really be knowledge . we be not bear with an innate understanding of our bias . these have to be identify by scientific investigation . but the good news be that become aware of the optimism bias do not shatter the illusion . it be like visual illusion , in which understand they do not make they go away . and this be good because it mean we should be able to strike a balance , to come up with plan and rule to protect ourselves from unrealistic optimism , but at the same time remain hopeful .     I think this cartoon portray it nicely . because if you be one of these pessimistic penguin up there who just do not believe they can fly , you certainly never will . because to make any kind of progress , we need to be able to imagine a different reality , and then we need to believe that that reality be possible . but if you be an extreme optimistic penguin who just jump down blindly hope for the good , you might find yourself in a bit of a mess when you hit the ground . but if you be an optimistic penguin who believe they can fly , but then adjust a parachute to your back just in case thing do not work out exactly as you have plan , you will soar like an eagle , even if you be just a penguin .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   when I be a child grow up in maine , one of my favorite thing to do be to look for sand dollar on the seashore of maine , because my parent tell I it would bring I luck . but you know , these shell , they be hard to find . they be cover in sand , they be difficult to see . however , over time , I got use to look for they . I start see shape and pattern that help I to collect they .     this grow into a passion for find thing , a love for the past and archaeology . and eventually , when I start study egyptology , I realize that see with my naked eye alone be not enough . because all of the sudden , in egypt , my beach have grow from a tiny beach in maine to one eight hundred mile long , next to the nile . and my sand dollar have grow to the size of city . this be really what bring I to use satellite imagery . for try to map the past , I know that I have to see differently .     so I want to show you an example of how we see differently use the infrared . this be a site locate in the eastern egyptian delta call mende . and the site visibly appear brown , but when we use the infrared and we process it , all of the sudden , use false color , the site appear as bright pink . what you be see be the actual chemical change to the landscape cause by the building material and activity of the ancient egyptian .     what I want to share with you today be how we 've use satellite datum to find an ancient egyptian city , call itjtawy , miss for thousand of year . itjtawy be ancient egypt 's capital for over four hundred year , at a period of time call the middle kingdom , about four thousand year ago . the site be locate in the faiyum of egypt , and the site be really important , because in the middle kingdom there be this great renaissance for ancient egyptian art , architecture and religion . egyptologist have always know the site of itjtawy be locate somewhere near the pyramid of the two king who build it , indicate within the red circle here , but somewhere within this massive flood plain . this area be huge — it be four mile by three mile in size . the nile use to flow right next to the city of itjtawy , and as it shift and change and move over time to the east , it cover over the city .     so , how do you find a bury city in a vast landscape ? find it randomly would be the equivalent of locate a needle in a haystack , blindfold , wear baseball mitt .     ( laughter )     so what we do be we use nasa topography datum to map out the landscape , very subtle change . we start to be able to see where the nile use to flow . but you can see in more detail , and even more interesting , this very slight raise area see within the circle up here which we think could possibly be the location of the city of itjtawy .     so we collaborate with egyptian scientist to do core work , which you see here . when I say core , it be like ice core , but instead of layer of climate change , you be look for layer of human occupation . and , five meter down , underneath a thick layer of mud , we find a dense layer of pottery . what this show be that at this possible location of itjtawy , five meter down , we have a layer of occupation for several hundred year , date to the middle kingdom , date to the exact period of time we think itjtawy be . we also find work stone — carnelian , quartz and agate that show that there be a jeweler 's workshop here . these might not look like much , but when you think about the most common stone use in jewelry from the middle kingdom , these be the stone that be use .     so , we have a dense layer of occupation date to the middle kingdom at this site . we also have evidence of an elite jeweler 's workshop , show that whatever be there be a very important city . no itjtawy be here yet , but we be go to be return to the site in the near future to map it out . and even more importantly , we have fund to train young egyptian in the use of satellite technology so they can be the one make great discovery as well .     so I want to end with my favorite quote from the middle kingdom — it be probably write at the city of itjtawy four thousand year ago . " share knowledge be the great of all calling . there be nothing like it in the land . " so as it turn out , ted be not found in 1984 ad .     ( laughter )     make idea actually start in 1984 bc at a not - lose - for - long city , find from above . it certainly put find seashell by the seashore in perspective .     thank you very much .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   on my desk in my office , I keep a small clay pot that I make in college . it be raku , which be a kind of pottery that begin in japan century ago as a way of make bowl for the japanese tea ceremony . this one be more than 400 year old . each one be pinch or carve out of a ball of clay , and it be the imperfection that people cherish .     everyday pot like this cup take eight to 10 hour to fire . I just take this out of the kiln last week , and the kiln itself take another day or two to cool down , but raku be really fast . you do it outside , and you take the kiln up to temperature . in 15 minute , it go to 1,500 degree , and as soon as you see that the glaze have melt inside , you can see that faint sheen , you turn the kiln off , and you reach in with these long metal tong , you grab the pot , and in japan , this red - hot pot would be immediately immerse in a solution of green tea , and you can imagine what that steam would smell like . but here in the united states , we ramp up the drama a little bit , and we drop our pot into sawdust , which catch on fire , and you take a garbage pail , and you put it on top , and smoke start pour out . I would come home with my clothe reeking of woodsmoke .     I love raku because it allow I to play with the element . I can shape a pot out of clay and choose a glaze , but then I have to let it go to the fire and the smoke , and what be wonderful be the surprise that happen , like this crackle pattern , because it be really stressful on these pot . they go from 1,500 degree to room temperature in the space of just a minute .     raku be a wonderful metaphor for the process of creativity . I find in so many thing that tension between what I can control and what I have to let go happen all the time , whether I be create a new radio show or just at home negotiate with my teenage son .     when I sit down to write a book about creativity , I realize that the step be reverse . I have to let go at the very beginning , and I have to immerse myself in the story of hundred of artist and writer and musician and filmmaker , and as I listen to these story , I realize that creativity grow out of everyday experience more often than you might think , include let go . it be suppose to break , but that be okay . ( laughter ) ( laugh ) that be part of the letting go , be sometimes it happen and sometimes it do not , because creativity also grow from the broken place .     the good way to learn about anything be through story , and so I want to tell you a story about work and play and about four aspect of life that we need to embrace in order for our own creativity to flourish . the first embrace be something that we think , " oh , this be very easy , " but it be actually get hard , and that be pay attention to the world around we . so many artist speak about need to be open , to embrace experience , and that be hard to do when you have a light rectangle in your pocket that take all of your focus .     the filmmaker mira nair speak about grow up in a small town in india . its name be bhubaneswar , and here be a picture of one of the temple in her town .     mira nair : in this little town , there be like 2,000 temple . we play cricket all the time . we kind of grow up in the rubble . the major thing that inspire I , that lead I on this path , that make I a filmmaker eventually , be travel folk theater that would come through the town and I would go off and see these great battle of good and evil by two people in a school field with no prop but with a lot of , you know , passion , and hashish as well , and it be amazing . you know , the folk tale of mahabharata and ramayana , the two holy book , the epic that everything come out of in india , they say . after see that jatra , the folk theater , I know I want to get on , you know , and perform .     julie burstein : be not that a wonderful story ? you can see the sort of break in the everyday . there they be in the school field , but it be good and evil , and passion and hashish . and mira nair be a young girl with thousand of other people watch this performance , but she be ready . she be ready to open up to what it spark in she , and it lead she , as she say , down this path to become an award - win filmmaker . so be open for that experience that might change you be the first thing we need to embrace .     artist also speak about how some of their most powerful work come out of the part of life that be most difficult . the novelist richard ford speak about a childhood challenge that continue to be something he wrestle with today . he be severely dyslexic .     richard ford : I be slow to learn to read , go all the way through school not really read more than the minimum , and still to this day can not read silently much fast than I can read aloud , but there be a lot of benefit to be dyslexic for I because when I finally do reconcile myself to how slow I be go to have to do it , then I think I come very slowly into an appreciation of all of those quality of language and of sentence that be not just the cognitive aspect of language : the syncopation , the sound of word , what word look like , where paragraph break , where line break . I mean , I be not so badly dyslexic that I be disabled from read . I just have to do it really slowly , and as I do , linger on those sentence as I have to linger , I fall heir to language 's other quality , which I think have help I write sentence .     jb : it be so powerful . richard ford , who be win the pulitzer prize , say that dyslexia help he write sentence . he have to embrace this challenge , and I use that word intentionally . he do not have to overcome dyslexia . he have to learn from it . he have to learn to hear the music in language .     artist also speak about how push up against the limit of what they can do , sometimes push into what they can not do , help they focus on find their own voice . the sculptor richard serra talk about how , as a young artist , he think he be a painter , and he live in florence after graduate school . while he be there , he travel to madrid , where he go to the prado to see this picture by the spanish painter diego velázquez . it be from 1656 , and it be call " las meninas , " and it be the picture of a little princess and her lady - in - wait , and if you look over that little blonde princess 's shoulder , you 'll see a mirror , and reflect in it be her parent , the king and queen of spain , who would be stand where you might stand to look at the picture . as he often do , velázquez put himself in this painting too . he be stand on the left with his paintbrush in one hand and his palette in the other .     richard serra : I be stand there look at it , and I realize that velázquez be look at I , and I think , " oh . I be the subject of the painting . " and I think , " I be not go to be able to do that painting . " I be to the point where I be use a stopwatch and painting square out of randomness , and I be not get anywhere . so I go back and dump all my painting in the arno , and I think , I be go to just start play around .     jb : richard serra say that so nonchalantly , you might have miss it . he go and see this painting by a guy who have be dead for 300 year , and realize , " I can not do that , " and so richard serra go back to his studio in florence , pick up all of his work up to that point , and throw it in a river . richard serra let go of painting at that moment , but he do not let go of art . he move to new york city , and he put together a list of verbs — to roll , to crease , to fold — more than a hundred of they , and as he say , he just start play around . he do these thing to all kind of material . he would take a huge sheet of lead and roll it up and unroll it . he would do the same thing to rubber , and when he get to the direction " to lift , " he create this , which be in the museum of modern art . richard serra have to let go of painting in order to embark on this playful exploration that lead he to the work that he be know for today : huge curve of steel that require our time and motion to experience . in sculpture , richard serra be able to do what he could not do in painting . he make we the subject of his art . so experience and challenge and limitation be all thing we need to embrace for creativity to flourish .     there be a fourth embrace , and it be the hard . it be the embrace of loss , the old and most constant of human experience . in order to create , we have to stand in that space between what we see in the world and what we hope for , look squarely at rejection , at heartbreak , at war , at death . that be a tough space to stand in . the educator parker palmer call it " the tragic gap , " tragic not because it be sad but because it be inevitable , and my friend dick nodel like to say , " you can hold that tension like a violin string and make something beautiful . "     that tension resonate in the work of the photographer joel meyerowitz , who at the beginning of his career be know for his street photography , for capture a moment on the street , and also for his beautiful photograph of landscape — of tuscany , of cape cod , of light . joel be a new yorker , and his studio for many year be in chelsea , with a straight view downtown to the world trade center , and he photograph those building in every sort of light . you know where this story go . on 9/11 , joel be not in new york . he be out of town , but he race back to the city , and race down to the site of the destruction .     joel meyerowitz : and like all the other passersby , I stand outside the chain link fence on chamber and greenwich , and all I could see be the smoke and a little bit of rubble , and I raise my camera to take a peek , just to see if there be something to see , and some cop , a lady cop , hit I on my shoulder , and say , " hey , no picture ! " and it be such a blow that it wake I up , in the way that it be mean to be , I guess . and when I ask she why no picture , she say , " it be a crime scene . no photograph allow . " and I ask she , " what would happen if I be a member of the press ? " and she tell I , " oh , look back there , " and back a block be the press corps tie up in a little pen - in area , and I say , " well , when do they go in ? " and she say , " probably never . " and as I walk away from that , I have this crystallization , probably from the blow , because it be an insult in a way . I think , " oh , if there be no picture , then there 'll be no record . we need a record . " and I think , " I be going to make that record . I 'll find a way to get in , because I do not want to see this history disappear . "     jb : he do . he pull in every favor he could , and get a pass into the world trade center site , where he photograph for nine month almost every day . look at these photograph today bring back the smell of smoke that linger on my clothe when I go home to my family at night . my office be just a few block away . but some of these photograph be beautiful , and we wonder , be it difficult for joel meyerowitz to make such beauty out of such devastation ?     jm : well , you know , ugly , I mean , powerful and tragic and horrific and everything , but it be also as , in nature , an enormous event that be transform after the fact into this residue , and like many other ruin — you go to the ruin of the colosseum or the ruin of a cathedral someplace — and they take on a new meaning when you watch the weather . I mean , there be afternoon I be down there , and the light go pink and there be a mist in the air and you be stand in the rubble , and I find myself recognize both the inherent beauty of nature and the fact that nature , as time , be erase this wound . time be unstoppable , and it transform the event . it get furth and far away from the day , and light and season temper it in some way , and it be not that I be a romantic . I be really a realist . the reality be , there be the woolworth building in a veil of smoke from the site , but it be now like a scrim across a theater , and it be turn pink , you know , and down below there be hose spray , and the light have come on for the evening , and the water be turn acid green because the sodium lamp be on , and I be think , " my god , who could dream this up ? " but the fact be , I be there , it look like that , you have to take a picture .     jb : you have to take a picture . that sense of urgency , of the need to get to work , be so powerful in joel 's story . when I see joel meyerowitz recently , I tell he how much I admire his passionate obstinacy , his determination to push through all the bureaucratic red tape to get to work , and he laugh , and he say , " I be stubborn , but I think what be more important be my passionate optimism . "     the first time I tell these story , a man in the audience raise his hand and say , " all these artist talk about their work , not their art , which have get I think about my work and where the creativity be there , and I be not an artist . " he be right . we all wrestle with experience and challenge , limit and loss . creativity be essential to all of we , whether we be scientist or teacher , parent or entrepreneur .     I want to leave you with another image of a japanese tea bowl . this one be at the free gallery in washington , d.c . it be more than a hundred year old and you can still see the fingermark where the potter pinch it . but as you can also see , this one do break at some point in its hundred year . but the person who put it back together , instead of hide the crack , decide to emphasize they , use gold lacquer to repair it . this bowl be more beautiful now , having be break , than it be when it be first make , and we can look at those crack , because they tell the story that we all live , of the cycle of creation and destruction , of control and let go , of pick up the piece and make something new . thank you . ( applause )  
   well , I be introduce as the former governor of michigan , but actually I be a scientist . all right , a political scientist , it do not really count , but my laboratory be the laboratory of democracy that be michigan , and , like any good scientist , I be experiment with policy about what would achieve the great good for the great number . but there be three problem , three enigma that I could not solve , and I want to share with you those problem , but most importantly , I think I figure out a proposal for a solution .     the first problem that not just michigan , but every state , face be , how do you create good job in america in a global economy ?     so let I share with you some empirical datum from my lab . I be elect in 2002 and , at the end of my first year in office in 2003 , I get a call from one of my staff member , who say , " gov , we have a big problem . we have a little tiny community call greenville , michigan , population 8,000 , and they be about to lose their major employer , which be a refrigerator factory that be operate by electrolux . "     and I say , " well , how many people work at electrolux ? "     and he say , " 3,000 of the 8,000 people in greenville . "     so it be a one - company town . and electrolux be go to go to mexico .     so I say , " forget that . I be the new governor . we can fix this . we be go to go to greenville with my whole cabinet and we will just make electrolux an offer they can not refuse . "     so I bring my whole cabinet , and we meet with all of the pooh - bah of little greenville — the mayor , the city manager , the head of the community college — and we basically empty our pocket and put all of our chip on the table , incentive , you name it , to convince electrolux to stay , and as we make our pile of chip , we slide they across the table to the management of electrolux . and in the pile be thing like zero taxis for 20 year , or that we would help to build a new factory for the company , we would help to finance it . the uaw , who represent the worker , say they would offer unprecedented concession , sacrifice to just keep those job in greenville .     so the management of electrolux take our pile , our list of incentive , and they go outside the room for 17 minute , and they come back in and they say , " wow , this be the most generous any community have ever be to try to keep job here . but there be nothing you can do to compensate for the fact that we can pay $ 1.57 an hour in juarez , mexico . so we be leave . "     and they do . and when they do , it be like a nuclear bomb go off in little greenville . in fact , they do implode the factory . that be a guy that be walk on his last day of work . and on the month that the last refrigerator roll off the assembly line , the employee of electrolux in greenville , michigan , have a gathering for themselves that they call the last supper . it be in a big pavilion in greenville , an indoor pavilion , and I go to it because I be so frustrated as governor that I could not stop the outflow of these job , and I want to grieve with they , and as I go into the room — there be thousand of people there . it be a just big thing . people be eat box lunch on roundtop table , and there be a sad band playing music , or a band play sad music , probably both . ( laughter )     and this guy come up to I , and he be get tattoos and his ponytail and his baseball cap on , and he have his two daughter with he , and he say , " gov , these be my two daughter . " he say , " I be 48 year old , and I have work at this factory for 30 year . I go from high school to factory . my father work at this factory , " he say . " my grandfather work at this factory . all I know be how to make refrigerator . " and he look at his daughter , and he put his hand on his chest , and he say , " so , gov , tell I , who be ever go to hire I ? who be ever go to hire I ? " and that be ask not just by that guy but by everyone in the pavilion , and frankly , by every worker at one of the 50,000 factory that close in the first decade of this century . enigma number one : how do you create job in america in a global economy ?     number two , very quickly : how do you solve global climate change when we do not even have a national energy policy in this country and when gridlock in congress seem to be the norm ? in fact , there be a poll that be do recently and the pollster compare congress 's approval rating to a number of other unpleasant thing , and it be find , in fact , that congress 's approval rating be bad than cockroach , lice , nickelback the band , root canal and donald trump . ( laughter ) but wait , the good news be it be at least well than meth lab and gonorrhea . ( laughter ) we get a problem , folk .     so it get I think , what be it ? what in the laboratory that I see out there , the laboratory of democracy , what have happen ? what policy prescription have happen that actually cause change to occur and that have be accept in a bipartisan way ? so if I ask you , for example , what be the obama administration policy that cause massive change across the country , what would you say ? you might say obamacare , except for those be not voluntary change . as we know , only half the state have opt in . we might say the recovery act , but those do not require policy change . the thing that cause massive policy change to occur be race to the top for education . why ? the government put a $ 4.5 billion pot and say to the governor across the country , compete for it . forty - eight governor compete , convince 48 state legislature to essentially raise standard for high schooler so that you all take a college prep curriculum . forty - eight state opt in , create a national [ education ] policy from the bottom up .     so I think , well , why can not we do something like that and create a clean energy job race to the top ? because after all , if you look at the context , 1.6 trillion dollar have be invest in the past eight year from the private sector globally , and every dollar represent a job , and where be those job go ? well , they be go to place that have policy , like china . in fact , I be in china to see what they be do , and they be put on a dog - and - pony show for the group that I be with , and I be stand in the back of the room during one of the demonstration and stand next to one of the chinese official , and we be watch , and he say , " so , gov , when do you think the u.s . be go to get national energy policy ? " and I say , " oh my god — congress , gridlock , who know ? "     and this be what he do , he go , he say , " take your time . " because they see our passivity as their opportunity .     so what if we decide to create a challenge to the governor of the country , and the price to entry into this competition use the same amount that the bipartisan group approve in congress for the race to the top for education , 4.5 billion , which sound like a lot , but actually it be less than one tenth of one percent of federal spending . it be a round error on the federal side . but price to entry into that competition would be , you could just , say , use the president 's goal . he want congress to adopt a clean energy standard of 80 percent by 2030 , in other word , that you would have to get 80 percent of your energy from clean source by the year 2030 . why not ask all of the state to do that instead ? and imagine what might happen , because every region have something to offer . you might take state like iowa and ohio — two very important political state , by the way — those two governor , and they would say , we be go to lead the nation in produce the wind turbine and the wind energy . you might say the solar state , the sun belt , we be go to be the state that produce solar energy for the country , and maybe jerry brown say , " well , I be go to create an industry cluster in california to be able to produce the solar panel so that we be not buy they from china but we be buy they from the u.s . " in fact , every region of the country could do this . you see , you 've get solar and wind you all across the nation . in fact , if you look just at the upper and northern state in the west , they could do geothermal , or you could look at texas and say , we could lead the nation in the solution to smart grid . in the middle eastern state which have access to forest and to agricultural waste , they might say , we be go to lead the nation in biofuel . in the upper northeast , we be go to lead the nation in energy efficiency solution . along the eastern seaboard , we be go to lead the nation in offshore wind . you might look at michigan and say , we be go to lead the nation in produce the gut for the electric vehicle , like the lithium ion battery . every region have something to offer , and if you create a competition , it respect the state and it respect federalism . it be opt - in . you might even get texas and south carolina , who do not opt into the education race to the top , you might even get they to opt in . why ? because republican and democratic governor love to cut ribbon . we want to bring job . I be just say . and it foster innovation at the state level in these laboratory of democracy .     now , any of you who be watch anything about politic lately might say , " okay , great idea , but really ? congress put four and a half billion dollar on the table ? they can not agree to anything . " so you could wait and go through congress , although you should be very impatient . or , you renegade , we could go around congress . go around congress . what if we create a private sector challenge to the governor ? what if several of the high - net worth company and individual who be here at ted decide that they would create , band together , just a couple of they , and create a national competition to the governor to have a race to the top and see how the governor respond ? what if it all start here at ted ? what if you be here when we figure out how to crack the code to create good pay job in america — ( applause ) — and get national energy policy and we create a national energy strategy from the bottom up ?     because , dear tedster , if you be impatient like I be , you know that our economic competitor , our other nation , be in the game and be eat we for lunch . and we can get in the game or not . we can be at the table or we can be on the table . and I do not know about you , but I prefer to dine .     thank you all so much . ( applause )  
   ( breathe in )     ( breathe out )     so , I do not always make my living from music . for about the five year after graduate from an upstande liberal art university , this be my day job .     ( laughter )     I be a self - employ living statue call the eight - foot bride , and I love tell people I do this for a job , because everybody always want to know , who be these freak in real life .     ( laughter )     hello .     I paint myself white one day , stand on a box , put a hat or a can at my foot , and when someone come by and drop in money , I hand they a flower — and some intense eye contact . and if they do not take the flower , I throw in a gesture of sadness and longing — as they walk away .     ( laughter )     so I have the most profound encounter with people , especially lonely people who look like they have not talk to anyone in week , and we would get this beautiful moment of prolonged eye contact be allow in a city street , and we would sort of fall in love a little bit . and my eye would say — " thank you . I see you . " and their eye would say — " nobody ever see I . thank you . "     I would get harass sometimes . people would yell at I from their car . " get a job ! " ( laugh ) and I would be , like , " this be my job . " but it hurt , because it make I fear that I be somehow do something un - joblike and unfair , shameful . I have no idea how perfect a real education I be get for the music business on this box . and for the economist out there , you may be interested to know I actually make a pretty predictable income , which be shocking to I , give I have no regular customer , but pretty much 60 buck on a tuesday , 90 buck on a friday . it be consistent .     and meanwhile , I be tour locally and play in nightclub with my band , the dresden doll . this be I on piano , a genius drummer . I write the song , and eventually we start make enough money that I could quit be a statue , and as we start tour , I really do not want to lose this sense of direct connection with people , because I love it . so after all of our show , we would sign autograph and hug fan and hang out and talk to people , and we make an art out of ask people to help we and join we , and I would track down local musician and artist and they would set up outside of our show , and they would pass the hat , and then they would come in and join we onstage , so we have this rotate smorgasbord of weird , random circus guest .     and then twitter come along , and make thing even more magic , because I could ask instantly for anything anywhere . so I would need a piano to practice on , and an hour later I would be at a fan 's house . this be in london . people would bring home - cook food to we all over the world backstage and feed we and eat with we . this be in seattle . fan who work in museum and store and any kind of public space would wave their hand if I would decide to do a last - minute , spontaneous , free gig . this be a library in auckland . on saturday I tweet for this crate and hat , because I do not want to schlep they from the east coast , and they show up care of this dude , chris , from newport beach , who say hello . I once tweet , " where in melbourne can I buy a neti pot ? " and a nurse from a hospital drive one right at that moment to the cafe I be in , and I buy she a smoothie and we sit there talk about nursing and death .     and I love this kind of random closeness , which be lucky , because I do a lot of couchsurfing . in mansion where everyone in my crew get their own room but there be no wireless , and in punk squat , everyone on the floor in one room with no toilet but with wireless , clearly make it the well option .     ( laughter )     my crew once pull our van up to a really poor miami neighborhood and we find out that our couchsurfe host for the night be an 18 - year - old girl , still live at home , and her family be all undocumented immigrant from hondura . and that night , her whole family take the couch and she sleep together with her mom so that we could take their bed . and I lie there thinking , these people have so little . be this fair ? and in the morning , her mom teach we how to try to make tortilla and want to give I a bible , and she take I aside and she say to I in her broken english , " your music have help my daughter so much . thank you for stay here . we be all so grateful . " and I think , this be fair . this be this .     a couple of month later , I be in manhattan , and I tweet for a crash pad , and at midnight , I be on the low east side , and it occur to I I 've never actually do this alone . I 've always be with my band or my crew . be this what stupid people do ?     ( laughter )     be this how stupid people die ? and before I can change my mind , the door bust open . she be an artist . he be a financial blogger for reuter , and they be pour I a glass of red wine and offer I a bath , and I have have thousand of night like that and like that .     so I couchsurf a lot . I also crowdsurf a lot . I maintain couchsurfe and crowdsurfing be basically the same thing . you be fall into the audience and you be trust each other . I once ask an opening band of mine if they want to go out into the crowd and pass the hat to get some extra money , something that I do a lot . and as usual , the band be psyche , but there be this one guy in the band who tell I he just could not bring himself to go out there . it feel too much like beg to stand there with the hat . and I recognize his fear of " be this fair ? " and " get a job . "     and meanwhile , my band be become big and big . we sign with a major label . and our music be a cross between punk and cabaret . it be not for everybody . well , maybe it be for you .     ( laughter )     we sign , and there be all this hype lead up to our next record . and it come out and it sell about 25,000 copy in the first few week , and the label consider this a failure .     I be like , " 25,000 , be not that a lot ? "     they say , " no , the sale be go down . it be a failure . " and they walk off .     right at this same time , I be sign and hug after a gig , and a guy come up to I and hand I a $ 10 bill , and he say , " I be sorry , I burn your cd from a friend . "     ( laughter )     " but I read your blog , I know you hate your label . I just want you to have this money . "     and this start happen all the time . I become the hat after my own gig , but I have to physically stand there and take the help from people , and unlike the guy in the opening band , I 've actually have a lot of practice stand there . thank you .     and this be the moment I decide I be just go to give away my music for free online whenever possible , so it be like metallica over here , napster , bad ; amanda palmer over here , and I be go to encourage torrenting , download , sharing , but I be go to ask for help , because I see it work on the street . so I fight my way off my label , and for my next project with my new band , the grand theft orchestra , I turn to crowdfunde . and I fall into those thousand of connection that I would make , and I ask my crowd to catch I . and the goal be 100,000 dollar . my fan back I at nearly 1.2 million , which be the big music crowdfunde project to date .     ( applause )     and you can see how many people it be . it be about 25,000 people .     and the medium ask , " amanda , the music business be tanking and you encourage piracy . how do you make all these people pay for music ? " and the real answer be , I do not make they . I ask they . and through the very act of ask people , I would connect with they , and when you connect with they , people want to help you . it be kind of counterintuitive for a lot of artist . they do not want to ask for thing . but it be not easy . it be not easy to ask . and a lot of artist have a problem with this . ask make you vulnerable .     and I get a lot of criticism online , after my kickstarter go big , for continue my crazy crowdsourcing practice , specifically for ask musician who be fan if they want to join we on stage for a few song in exchange for love and ticket and beer , and this be a doctor image that go up of I on a website . and this hurt in a really familiar way . and people say , " you be not allow anymore to ask for that kind of help , " really remind I of the people in their car yell , " get a job . " because they be not with we on the sidewalk , and they could not see the exchange that be happen between I and my crowd , an exchange that be very fair to we but alien to they .     so this be slightly not safe for work . this be my kickstarter backer party in berlin . at the end of the night , I strip and let everyone draw on I . now let I tell you , if you want to experience the visceral feeling of trust stranger —     ( laughter )     I recommend this , especially if those stranger be drunk german people .     ( laughter )     this be a ninja master - level fan connection , because what I be really say here be , I trust you this much . should I ? show I .     for most of human history , musician , artist , they 've be part of the community . connector and opener , not untouchable star . celebrity be about a lot of people love you from a distance , but the internet and the content that we be freely able to share on it be take we back . it be about a few people love you up close and about those people be enough . so a lot of people be confuse by the idea of no hard sticker price . they see it as an unpredictable risk , but the thing I 've do , the kickstarter , the street , the doorbell , I do not see these thing as risk . I see they as trust . now , the online tool to make the exchange as easy and as instinctive as the street , they be get there . but the perfect tool be not go to help we if we can not face each other and give and receive fearlessly , but , more important — to ask without shame .     my music career have be spend try to encounter people on the internet the way I could on the box . so blogge and tweet not just about my tour date and my new video but about our work and our art and our fear and our hangover , our mistake , and we see each other . and I think when we really see each other , we want to help each other .     I think people have be obsess with the wrong question , which be , " how do we make people pay for music ? " what if we start ask , " how do we let people pay for music ? "     thank you .     ( applause )  
   the kraken , a beast so terrify it be say to devour man and ship and whale , and so enormous it could be mistake for an island . in assess the merit of such tale , it be probably wise to keep in mind that old sailor 's see that the only difference between a fairytale and a sea story be a fairytale begin , " once upon a time , " and a sea story begin , " this be not no shit . " ( laughter )     every fish that get away grow with every telling of the tale . nevertheless , there be giant in the ocean , and we now have video proof , as those of you that see the discovery channel documentary be no doubt aware .     I be one of the three scientist on this expedition that take place last summer off japan . I be the short one . the other two be dr . tsunemi kubodera and dr . steve o'shea .     I owe my participation in this now - historic event to ted . in 2010 , there be a ted event call mission blue hold aboard the lindblad explorer in the galapagos as part of the fulfillment of sylvia earle 's ted wish . I speak about a new way of explore the ocean , one that focus on attract animal instead of scare they away . mike degruy be also invite , and he speak with great passion about his love of the ocean , and he also talk to I about apply my approach to something he be be involve with for a very long time , which be the hunt for the giant squid . it be mike that get I invite to the squid summit , a gathering of squid expert at the discovery channel that summer during shark week . ( laughter )     I give a talk on unobtrusive view and optical luring of deep sea squid in which I emphasize the importance of use quiet , unobtrusive platform for exploration . this come out of hundred of dive I have make , fart around in the dark use these platform , and my impression that I see more animal work from the submersible than I do with either of the remote - operate vehicle . but that could just be because the submersible have a wide field of view . but I also feel like I see more animal work with the tiburon than the ventana , two vehicle with the same field of view but different propulsion system .     so my suspicion be that it might have something to do with the amount of noise they make . so I set up a hydrophone on the bottom of the ocean , and I have each of these fly by at the same speed and distance and record the sound they make . the johnson sea - link — ( whirring noise ) — which you can probably just barely hear here , use electric thruster — very , very quiet . the tiburon also use electric powered thruster . it be also pretty quiet , but a bit noisier . ( loud whirring noise ) but most deep - diving rovs these day use hydraulics and they sound like the ventana . ( loud beeping noise ) I think that be get to be scare a lot of animal away .     so for the deep sea squid hunt , I propose use an optical lure attach to a camera platform with no thruster , no motor , just a battery - power camera , and the only illumination come from red light that be invisible to most deep - sea animal that be adapt to see primarily blue . that be visible to our eye , but it be the equivalent of infrared in the deep sea . so this camera platform , which we call the medusa , could just be throw off the back of the ship , attach to a float at the surface with over 2,000 foot of line , it would just float around passively carry by the current , and the only light visible to the animal in the deep would be the blue light of the optical lure , which we call the electronic jellyfish , or e - jelly , because it be design to imitate the bioluminescent display of the common deep sea jellyfish atolla .     now , this pinwheel of light that the atolla produce be know as a bioluminescent burglar alarm and be a form of defense . the reason that the electronic jellyfish work as a lure be not because giant squid eat jellyfish , but it be because this jellyfish only resort to produce this light when it be be chew on by a predator and its only hope for escape may be to attract the attention of a large predator that will attack its attacker and thereby afford it an opportunity for escape . it be a scream for help , a last - ditch attempt for escape , and a common form of defense in the deep sea .     the approach work . whereas all previous expedition have fail to garner a single video glimpse of the giant , we manage six , and the first trigger wild excitement .     edith widder ( on video ): oh my god . oh my god ! be you kid me?other scientist : oh ho ho ! that be just hang there .     ew : it be like it be tease we , do a kind of fan dance — now you see I , now you do not — and we have four such teasing appearance , and then on the fifth , it come in and totally wow we .     ( music ) narrator : ( speak in japanese )     scientist : ooh . bang ! oh my god ! whoa !     ( applause )     ew : the full monty .     what really wow I about that be the way it come in up over the e - jelly and then attack the enormous thing next to it , which I think it mistake for the predator on the e - jelly .     but even more incredible be the footage shoot from the triton submersible . what be not mention in the discovery documentary be that the bait squid that dr . kubodera use , a one - meter long diamondback squid have a light attach to it , a squid jig of the type that longline fisherman use , and I think it be this light that bring the giant in .     now , what you be see be the intensify camera 's view under red light , and that be all dr . kubodera could see when the giant come in here . and then he get so excited , he turn on his flashlight because he want to see well , and the giant do not run away , so he risk turn on the white light on the submersible , bring a creature of legend from the misty history into high - resolution video . it be absolutely breathtaking , and have this animal have its feeding tentacle intact and fully extend , it would have be as tall as a two - story house .     how could something that big live in our ocean and yet remain unfilmed until now ? we 've only explore about five percent of our ocean . there be great discovery yet to be make down there , fantastic creature represent million of year of evolution and possibly bioactive compound that could benefit we in way that we can not even yet imagine . yet we have spend only a tiny fraction of the money on ocean exploration that we 've spend on space exploration . we need a nasa - like organization for ocean exploration , because we need to be explore and protect our life support system here on earth .     we need — thank you . ( applause )     exploration be the engine that drive innovation . innovation drive economic growth . so let us all go explore , but let us do it in a way that do not scare the animal away , or , as mike degruy once say , " if you want to get away from it all and see something you 've never see , or have an excellent chance of see something that no one be ever see , get in a sub . " he should have be with we for this adventure . we miss he . ( applause )  
   when I be little , I think my country be the good on the planet . and I grow up singe a song call " nothing to envy . " and I be very proud . in school , we spend a lot of time study the history of kim il - sung , but we never learn much about the outside world , except that america , south korea , japan be the enemy . although I often wonder about the outside world , I think I would spend my entire life in north korea , until everything suddenly change .     when I be seven year old , I see my first public execution . but I think my life in north korea be normal . my family be not poor , and myself , I have never experience hunger .     but one day , in 1995 , my mom bring home a letter from a coworker 's sister . it read , " when you read this , our five family member will not exist in this world , because we have not eat for the past three week . we be lie on the floor together , and our body be so weak , we be wait to die . "     I be so shocked . this be the first time I hear that people in my country be suffer . soon after , when I be walk past a train station , I see something terrible that to this day I can not erase from my memory . a lifeless woman be lie on the ground , while an emaciated child in her arm just stare helplessly at his mother 's face . but nobody help they , because they be so focused on take care of themselves and their family .     a huge famine hit north korea in the mid-1990 . ultimately , more than a million north korean die during the famine , and many only survive by eat grass , bug and tree bark . power outage also become more and more frequent , so everything around I be completely dark at night , except for the sea of light in china , just across the river from my home . I always wonder why they have light , but we do not . this be a satellite picture show north korea at night , compare to neighbor .     this be the amnok river , which serve as a part of the border between north korea and china . as you can see , the river can be very narrow at certain point , allow north koreans to secretly cross . but many die . sometimes , I see dead body float down the river . I can not reveal many detail about how I leave north korea , but I only can say that during the ugly year of the famine , I be send to china to live with distant relative . but I only think that I would be separate from my family for a short time . I could have never imagine that it would take 14 year to live together .     in china , it be hard live as a young girl without my family . I have no idea what life be go to be like as a north korean refugee . but I soon learn it be not only extremely difficult , it be also very dangerous , since north korean refugee be consider in china as illegal migrant . so I be live in constant fear that my identity could be reveal , and I would be repatriate to a horrible fate , back in north korea .     one day , my bad nightmare come true , when I be catch by the chinese police , and bring to the police station for interrogation . someone have accuse I of be north korean , so they test my chinese language ability , and ask I ton of question . I be so scared . I think my heart be go to explode . if anything seem unnatural , I could be imprison and repatriate . I think my life be over . but I manage to control all the emotion inside I , and answer the question . after they finish question I , one official say to another , " this be a false report . she be not north korean . " and they let I go . it be a miracle .     some north koreans in china seek asylum in foreign embassy . but many can be catch by the chinese police , and repatriate . these girl be so lucky . even though they be catch , they be eventually release , after heavy international pressure . these north koreans be not so lucky . every year , countless north koreans be catch in china and repatriate to north korea , where they can be torture , imprison , or publicly execute .     even though I be really fortunate to get out , many other north koreans have not be so lucky . it be tragic that north koreans have to hide their identity and struggle so hard just to survive . even after learn a new language and get a job , their whole world can be turn upside down in an instant . that be why , after 10 year of hide my identity , I decide to risk go to south korea . and I start a new life yet again .     settle down in south korea be a lot more challenging than I have expect . english be so important in south korea , so I have to start learn my third language . also , I realize there be a wide gap between north and south . we be all korean , but inside , we have become very different , due to 67 year of division . I even go through an identity crisis . be I south korean or north korean ? where be I from ? who be I ? suddenly , there be no country I could proudly call my own .     even though adjust to life in south korea be not easy , I make a plan — I start study for the university entrance exam .     just as I be start to get use to my new life , I receive a shocking phone call . the north korean authority intercept some money that I send to my family , and , as a punishment , my family be go to be forcibly remove to a desolate location in the countryside . they have to get out quickly . so I start plan how to help they escape .     north koreans have to travel incredible distance on the path to freedom . it be almost impossible to cross the border between north korea and south korea . so , ironically , I take a flight back to china and head toward the north korean border . since my family could not speak chinese , I have to guide they somehow through more than 2,000 mile in china , and then into southeast asia . the journey by bus take one week , and we be almost catch several time . one time , our bus be stop and board by a chinese police officer . he take everyone 's i.d . card , and he start ask they question . since my family could not understand chinese , I think my family be go to be arrest . as the chinese officer approach my family , I impulsively stand up , and I tell he that these be deaf and dumb people that I be chaperone . he look at I suspiciously , but luckily , he believe I .     we make it all the way to the border of laos . but I have to spend almost all my money to bribe the border guard in laos . but even after we get past the border , my family be arrest and jail for illegal border crossing . after I pay the fine and bribe , my family be release in one month . but soon after , my family be arrest and jail again , in the capital of laos .     this be one of the low point in my life . I do everything to get my family to freedom , and we come so close , but my family be throw in jail , just a short distance from the south korean embassy . I go back and forth between the immigration office and the police station , desperately try to get my family out . but I do not have enough money to pay a bribe or fine anymore . I lose all hope .     at that moment , I hear one man 's voice ask I , " what be wrong ? " I be so surprised that a total stranger care enough to ask . in my broken english , and with a dictionary , I explain the situation , and without hesitate , the man go to the atm , and he pay the rest of the money for my family , and two other north koreans to get out of jail .     I thank he with all my heart , and I ask he , " why be you help I ? "     " I be not help you , " he say . " I be help the north korean people . "     I realize that this be a symbolic moment in my life . the kind stranger symbolize new hope for I and the north korean people , when we need it most . and he show I that the kindness of stranger and the support of the international community be truly the ray of hope we north korean people need .     eventually , after our long journey , my family and I be reunite in south korea . but get to freedom be only half the battle . many north koreans be separate from their family , and when they arrive in a new country , they start with little or no money . so we can benefit from the international community for education , english language training , job training , and more . we can also act as a bridge between the people inside north korea and the outside world . because many of we stay in contact with family member still inside , and we send information and money that be help to change north korea from inside .     I 've be so lucky , receive so much help and inspiration in my life , so I want to help give aspire north koreans a chance to prosper with international support . I be confident that you will see more and more north koreans succeed all over the world , include the ted stage .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   everything be cover in invisible ecosystem make of tiny lifeform : bacteria , virus and fungi . our desk , our computer , our pencil , our building all harbor resident microbial landscape . as we design these thing , we could be think about design these invisible world , and also think about how they interact with our personal ecosystem .     our body be home to trillion of microbe , and these creature define who we be . the microbe in your gut can influence your weight and your mood . the microbe on your skin can help boost your immune system . the microbe in your mouth can freshen your breath , or not , and the key thing be that our personal ecosystem interact with ecosystem on everything we touch . so , for example , when you touch a pencil , microbial exchange happen .     if we can design the invisible ecosystem in our surrounding , this open a path to influence our health in unprecedented way .     I get ask all of the time from people , " be it possible to really design microbial ecosystem ? " and I believe the answer be yes . I think we be do it right now , but we be do it unconsciously . I be go to share datum with you from one aspect of my research focus on architecture that demonstrate how , through both conscious and unconscious design , we be impact these invisible world .     this be the lillis business complex at the university of oregon , and I work with a team of architect and biologist to sample over 300 room in this building . we want to get something like a fossil record of the building , and to do this , we sample dust . from the dust , we pull out bacterial cell , break they open , and compare their gene sequence . this mean that people in my group be do a lot of vacuuming during this project . this be a picture of tim , who , right when I snap this picture , remind I , he say , " jessica , the last lab group I work in I be do fieldwork in the costa rican rainforest , and thing have change dramatically for I . "     so I be go to show you now first what we find in the office , and we be go to look at the datum through a visualization tool that I 've be work on in partnership with autodesk . the way that you look at this data be , first , look around the outside of the circle . you 'll see broad bacterial group , and if you look at the shape of this pink lobe , it tell you something about the relative abundance of each group . so at 12 o'clock , you 'll see that office have a lot of alphaproteobacteria , and at one o'clock you 'll see that bacilli be relatively rare .     let us take a look at what be go on in different space type in this building . if you look inside the restroom , you all have really similar ecosystem , and if you be to look inside the classroom , those also have similar ecosystem . but if you look across these space type , you can see that they be fundamentally different from one another . I like to think of bathroom like a tropical rainforest . I tell tim , " if you could just see the microbe , it be kind of like be in costa rica . kind of . " and I also like to think of office as be a temperate grassland .     this perspective be a really powerful one for designer , because you can bring on principle of ecology , and a really important principle of ecology be dispersal , the way organism move around . we know that microbe be disperse around by people and by air . so the very first thing we want to do in this building be look at the air system . mechanical engineer design air handling unit to make sure that people be comfortable , that the air flow and temperature be just right . they do this use principle of physics and chemistry , but they could also be use biology . if you look at the microbe in one of the air handle unit in this building , you 'll see that they be all very similar to one another . and if you compare this to the microbe in a different air handling unit , you 'll see that they be fundamentally different . the room in this building be like island in an archipelago , and what that mean be that mechanical engineer be like eco - engineer , and they have the ability to structure biome in this building the way that they want to .     another facet of how microbe get around be by people , and designer often cluster room together to facilitate interaction among people , or the sharing of idea , like in lab and in office . give that microbe travel around with people , you might expect to see room that be close together have really similar biome . and that be exactly what we find . if you look at classroom right adjacent to one another , they have very similar ecosystem , but if you go to an office that be a far walking distance away , the ecosystem be fundamentally different . and when I see the power that dispersal have on these biogeographic pattern , it make I think that it be possible to tackle really challenging problem , like hospital - acquire infection . I believe this have get to be , in part , a building ecology problem .     all right , I be go to tell you one more story about this building . I be collaborate with charlie brown . he be an architect , and charlie be deeply concerned about global climate change . he be dedicate his life to sustainable design . when he meet I and realize that it be possible for he to study in a quantitative way how his design choice impact the ecology and biology of this building , he get really excited , because it add a new dimension to what he do . he go from think just about energy to also start to think about human health . he help design some of the air handling system in this building and the way it be ventilate .     so what I be first go to show you be air that we sample outside of the building . what you be look at be a signature of bacterial community in the outdoor air , and how they vary over time . next I be go to show you what happen when we experimentally manipulate classroom . we block they off at night so that they get no ventilation . a lot of building be operate this way , probably where you work , and company do this to save money on their energy bill . what we find be that these room remain relatively stagnant until saturday , when we open the vent up again . when you walk into those room , they smell really bad , and our datum suggest that it have something to do with leave behind the airborne bacterial soup from people the day before . contrast this to room that be design use a sustainable passive design strategy where air come in from the outside through louver . in these room , the air track the outdoor air relatively well , and when charlie see this , he get really excited . he feel like he have make a good choice with the design process because it be both energy efficient and it wash away the building 's resident microbial landscape .     the example that I just give you be about architecture , but they be relevant to the design of anything . imagine design with the kind of microbe that we want in a plane or on a phone .     there be a new microbe , I just discover it . it be call blis , and it be be show to both ward off pathogen and give you good breath . would not it be awesome if we all have bli on our phone ?     a conscious approach to design , I be call it bioinformed design , and I think it be possible .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   let us talk dirty . a few year ago , oddly enough , I need the bathroom , and I find one , a public bathroom , and I go into the stall , and I prepare to do what I have do most of my life : use the toilet , flush the toilet , forget about the toilet . and for some reason that day , instead , I ask myself a question , and it be , where do this stuff go ? and with that question , I find myself plunge into the world of sanitation — there be more coming — ( laughter ) — sanitation , toilet and poop , and I have yet to emerge . and that be because it be such an enraging , yet engage place to be .     to go back to that toilet , it be not a particularly fancy toilet , it be not as nice as this one from the world toilet organization . that be the other wto . ( laughter ) but it have a lockable door , it have privacy , it have water , it have soap so I could wash my hand , and I do because I be a woman , and we do that .     ( laughter ) ( applause )     but that day , when I ask that question , I learn something , and that be that I would grow up think that a toilet like that be my right , when in fact it be a privilege . 2.5 billion people worldwide have no adequate toilet . they do not have a bucket or a box . forty percent of the world with no adequate toilet . and they have to do what this little boy be do by the side of the mumbai airport expressway , which be call open defecation , or poo - pooing in the open . and he do that every day , and every day , probably , that guy in the picture walk on by , because he see that little boy , but he do not see he .     but he should , because the problem with all that poop lie around be that poop carry passenger . fifty communicable disease like to travel in human shit . all those thing , the egg , the cyst , the bacteria , the virus , all those can travel in one gram of human fece . how ? well , that little boy will not have wash his hand . he be barefoot . he 'll run back into his house , and he will contaminate his drinking water and his food and his environment with whatever disease he may be carry by fecal particle that be on his finger and foot . in what I call the flushed - and - plumb world that most of we in this room be lucky to live in , the most common symptom associate with those disease , diarrhea , be now a bit of a joke . it be the run , the hershey squirt , the squit . where I come from , we call it delhi belly , as a legacy of empire . but if you search for a stock photo of diarrhea in a lead photo image agency , this be the picture that you come up with . ( laughter ) still not sure about the bikini . and here be another image of diarrhea . this be marie saylee , nine month old . you can not see she , because she be bury under that green grass in a little village in liberia , because she die in three day from diarrhea — the hershey squirt , the run , a joke . and that be her dad . but she be not alone that day , because 4,000 other child die of diarrhea , and they do every day . diarrhea be the second big killer of child worldwide , and you 've probably be ask to care about thing like hiv / aids or t.b . or measle , but diarrhea kill more child than all those three thing put together . it be a very potent weapon of mass destruction . and the cost to the world be immense : 260 billion dollar lose every year on the loss to poor sanitation . these be cholera bed in haiti . you 'll have hear of cholera , but we do not hear about diarrhea . it get a fraction of the attention and funding give to any of those other disease .     but we know how to fix this . we know , because in the mid-19th century , wonderful victorian engineer instal system of sewer and wastewater treatment and the flush toilet , and disease drop dramatically . child mortality drop by the most it have ever drop in history . the flush toilet be vote the good medical advance of the last 200 year by the reader of the british medical journal , and they be choose over the pill , anesthesia , and surgery . it be a wonderful waste disposal device .     but I think that it be so good — it do not smell , we can put it in our house , we can lock it behind a door — and I think we 've lock it out of conversation too . we do not have a neutral word for it . poop be not particularly adequate . shit offends people . fece be too medical .     because I can not explain otherwise , when I look at the figure , what be go on . we know how to solve diarrhea and sanitation , but if you look at the budget of country , develop and develop , you 'll think there be something wrong with the math , because you 'll expect absurdity like pakistan spend 47 time more on its military than it do on water and sanitation , even though 150,000 child die of diarrhea in pakistan every year . but then you look at that already minuscule water and sanitation budget , and 75 to 90 percent of it will go on clean water supply , which be great ; we all need water . no one be go to refuse clean water . but the humble latrine , or flush toilet , reduce disease by twice as much as just put in clean water . think about it . that little boy who be run back into his house , he may have a nice , clean fresh water supply , but he be get dirty hand that he be go to contaminate his water supply with .     and I think that the real waste of human waste be that we be waste it as a resource and as an incredible trigger for development , because these be a few thing that toilet and poop itself can do for we . so a toilet can put a girl back in school . twenty - five percent of girl in india drop out of school because they have no adequate sanitation . they 've be use to sit through lesson for year and year hold it in . we 've all do that , but they do it every day , and when they hit puberty and they start menstruate , it just get too much . and I understand that . who can blame they ? so if you meet an educationalist and say , " I can improve education attendance rate by 25 percent with just one simple thing , " you would make a lot of friend in education .     that be not the only thing it can do for you . poop can cook your dinner . it be get nutrient in it . we ingest nutrient . we excrete nutrient as well . we do not keep they all . in rwanda , they be now get 75 percent of their cooking fuel in their prison system from the content of prisoner ' bowel . so these be a bunch of inmate in a prison in butare . they be genocidal inmate , most of they , and they be stir the content of their own latrine , because if you put poop in a seal environment , in a tank , pretty much like a stomach , then , pretty much like a stomach , it give off gas , and you can cook with it . and you might think it be just good karma to see these guy stir shit , but it be also good economic sense , because they be save a million dollar a year . they be cut down on deforestation , and they 've find a fuel supply that be inexhaustible , infinite and free at the point of production .     it be not just in the poor world that poop can save life . here be a woman who be about to get a dose of the brown stuff in those syrinx , which be what you think it be , except not quite , because it be actually donate . there be now a new career path call stool donor . it be like the new sperm donor . because she have be suffer from a superbug call c. diff , and it be resistant to antibiotic in many case . she be be suffer for year . she get a dose of healthy human fece , and the cure rate for this procedure be 94 percent . it be astonishing , but hardly anyone be still do it . maybe it be the ick factor . that be okay , because there be a team of research scientist in canada who have now create a stool sample , a fake stool sample which be call repoopulate .     so you would be think by now , okay , the solution 's simple , we give everyone a toilet . and this be where it get really interesting , because it be not that simple , because we be not simple . so the really interesting , exciting work — this be the engage bit — in sanitation be that we need to understand human psychology . we need to understand software as well as just give someone hardware . they 've find in many develop country that government have go in and give out free latrine and go back a few year later and find that they 've get lot of new goat shed or temple or spare room with their owner happily walk past they and go over to the open defecate ground .     so the idea be to manipulate human emotion . it be be do for decade . the soap company do it in the early 20th century . they try sell soap as healthy . no one buy it . they try sell it as sexy . everyone buy it . in india now there be a campaign which persuade young bride not to marry into family that do not have a toilet . it be call " no loo , no I do . " ( laughter ) and in case you think that poster 's just propaganda , here be priyanka , 23 year old . I meet her last october in india , and she grow up in a conservative environment . she grow up in a rural village in a poor area of india , and she be engage at 14 , and then at 21 or so , she move into her in - law 's house . and she be horrified to get there and find that they do not have a toilet . she would grow up with a latrine . it be no big deal , but it be a latrine . and the first night she be there , she be tell that at 4 o'clock in the morning — her mother - in - law get she up , tell she to go outside and go and do it in the dark in the open . and she be scared . she be scared of drunk hang around . she be scared of snake . she be scared of rape . after three day , she do an unthinkable thing . she leave . and if you know anything about rural india , you 'll know that be an unspeakably courageous thing to do . but not just that . she get her toilet , and now she go around all the other village in india persuade other woman to do the same thing . it be what I call social contagion , and it be really powerful and really exciting .     another version of this , another village in india near where priyanka live be this village , call lakara , and about a year ago , it have no toilet whatsoever . kid be die of diarrhea and cholera . some visitor come , use various behavioral change trick like put out a plate of food and a plate of shit and watch the fly go one to the other . somehow , people who have be think that what they be do be not disgusting at all suddenly think , " oop . " not only that , but they be ingest their neighbor ' shit . that be what really make they change their behavior . so this woman , this boy 's mother instal this latrine in a few hour . her entire life , she have be use the banana field behind , but she instal the latrine in a few hour . it cost nothing . it be go to save that boy 's life .     so when I get despondent about the state of sanitation , even though these be pretty exciting time because we 've get the bill and melinda gate foundation reinvent the toilet , which be great , we 've get matt damon go on bathroom strike , which be great for humanity , very bad for his colon . but there be thing to worry about . it be the most off - track millennium development goal . it be about 50 or so year off track . we be not go to meet target , provide people with sanitation at this rate . so when I get sad about sanitation , I think of japan , because japan 70 year ago be a nation of people who use pit latrine and wipe with stick , and now it be a nation of what be call woshuretto , washlet toilet . they have in - build bidet nozzle for a lovely , hand - free cleaning experience , and they have various other feature like a heated seat and an automatic lid - raise device which be know as the " marriage - saver . " ( laughter )     but most importantly , what they have do in japan , which I find so inspirational , be they 've bring the toilet out from behind the locked door . they 've make it conversational . people go out and upgrade their toilet . they talk about it . they 've sanitize it . I hope that we can do that . it be not a difficult thing to do . all we really need to do be look at this issue as the urgent , shameful issue that it be . and do not think that it be just in the poor world that thing be wrong . our sewer be crumble . thing be go wrong here too . the solution to all of this be pretty easy . I be go to make your life easy this afternoon and just ask you to do one thing , and that be to go out , protest , speak about the unspeakable , and talk shit .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   what you be do , right now , at this very moment , be kill you . more than car or the internet or even that little mobile device we keep talk about , the technology you be use the most almost every day be this , your tush . nowadays people be sit 9.3 hour a day , which be more than we be sleep , at 7.7 hour . sit be so incredibly prevalent , we do not even question how much we be do it , and because everyone else be do it , it do not even occur to we that it be not okay . in that way , sitting have become the smoking of our generation .     of course there be health consequence to this , scary one , besides the waist . thing like breast cancer and colon cancer be directly tie to our lack of physical [ activity ] , ten percent in fact , on both of those . six percent for heart disease , seven percent for type 2 diabetes , which be what my father die of . now , any of those stat should convince each of we to get off our duff more , but if you be anything like I , it will not .     what do get I move be a social interaction . someone invite I to a meeting , but could not manage to fit I in to a regular sort of conference room meeting , and say , " I have to walk my dog tomorrow . could you come then ? " it seem kind of odd to do , and actually , that first meeting , I remember think , " I have to be the one to ask the next question , " because I know I be go to huff and puff during this conversation . and yet , I 've take that idea and make it my own . so instead of go to coffee meeting or fluorescent - light conference room meeting , I ask people to go on a walking meeting , to the tune of 20 to 30 mile a week . it be change my life .     but before that , what actually happen be , I use to think about it as , you could take care of your health , or you could take care of obligation , and one always come at the cost of the other . so now , several hundred of these walking meeting later , I 've learn a few thing .     first , there be this amazing thing about actually get out of the box that lead to out - of - the - box thinking . whether it be nature or the exercise itself , it certainly work .     and second , and probably the more reflective one , be just about how much each of we can hold problem in opposition when they be really not that way . and if we be go to solve problem and look at the world really differently , whether it be in governance or business or environmental issue , job creation , maybe we can think about how to reframe those problem as have both thing be true . because it be when that happen with this walk - and - talk idea that thing become doable and sustainable and viable .     so I start this talk talk about the tush , so I 'll end with the bottom line , which be , walk and talk . walk the talk . you 'll be surprised at how fresh air drive fresh thinking , and in the way that you do , you 'll bring into your life an entirely new set of idea .     thank you .     ( applause )  
grow up in taiwan as the daughter of a calligrapher , one of my most treasured memory be my mother show I the beauty , the shape and the form of chinese character . ever since then , I be fascinate by this incredible language .     but to an outsider , it seem to be as impenetrable as the great wall of china . over the past few year , I 've be wonder if I can break down this wall , so anyone who want to understand and appreciate the beauty of this sophisticated language could do so . I start think about how a new , fast method of learn chinese might be useful .     since the age of five , I start to learn how to draw every single stroke for each character in the correct sequence . I learn new character every day during the course of the next 15 year . since we only have five minute , it be well that we have a fast and simple way . a chinese scholar would understand 20,000 character . you only need 1,000 to understand the basic literacy . the top 200 will allow you to comprehend 40 percent of basic literature — enough to read road sign , restaurant menu , to understand the basic idea of the web page or the newspaper . today I be go to start with eight to show you how the method work . you be ready ?     open your mouth as wide as possible until it be square . you get a mouth . this be a person go for a walk . person . if the shape of the fire be a person with two arm on both side , as if she be yell frantically , " help ! I be on fire ! " — this symbol actually be originally from the shape of the flame , but I like to think that way . whichever work for you . this be a tree . tree . this be a mountain . the sun . the moon . the symbol of the door look like a pair of saloon door in the wild west .     I call these eight character radical . they be the building block for you to create lot more character . a person . if someone walk behind , that be " to follow . " as the old saying go , two be company , three be a crowd . if a person stretch their arm wide , this person be say , " it be this big . " the person inside the mouth , the person be trap . he be a prisoner , just like jonah inside the whale . one tree be a tree . two tree together , we have the wood . three tree together , we create the forest . put a plank underneath the tree , we have the foundation . put a mouth on the top of the tree , that be " idiot . " ( laughter ) easy to remember , since a talking tree be pretty idiotic . remember fire ? two fire together , I get really hot . three fire together , that be a lot of flame . set the fire underneath the two tree , it be burn . for we , the sun be the source of prosperity . two sun together , prosperous . three together , that be sparkle . put the sun and the moon shine together , it be brightness . it also mean tomorrow , after a day and a night . the sun be come up above the horizon . sunrise . a door . put a plank inside the door , it be a door bolt . put a mouth inside the door , ask question . knock knock . be anyone home ? this person be sneak out of a door , escaping , evade . on the left , we have a woman . two woman together , they have an argument . ( laughter ) three woman together , be careful , it be adultery .     so we have go through almost 30 character . by use this method , the first eight radical will allow you to build 32 . the next group of eight character will build an extra 32 . so with very little effort , you will be able to learn a couple hundred character , which be the same as a chinese eight - year - old . so after we know the character , we start build phrase . for example , the mountain and the fire together , we have fire mountain . it be a volcano . we know japan be the land of the rise sun . this be a sun place with the origin , because japan lie to the east of china . so a sun , origin together , we build japan . a person behind japan , what do we get ? a japanese person .     the character on the left be two mountain stack on top of each other . in ancient china , that mean in exile , because chinese emperor , they put their political enemy in exile beyond mountain . nowadays , exile have turn into get out . a mouth which tell you where to get out be an exit .     this be a slide to remind I that I should stop talk and get off of the stage . thank you .     ( applause )
   when I be in my 20 , I see my very first psychotherapy client . I be a ph.d . student in clinical psychology at berkeley . she be a 26 - year - old woman name alex .     now alex walk into her first session wear jean and a big slouchy top , and she drop onto the couch in my office and kick off her flat and tell I she be there to talk about guy problem . now when I hear this , I be so relieved . my classmate get an arsonist for her first client .     ( laughter )     and I get a twentysomething who want to talk about boy . this I think I could handle . but I do not handle it . with the funny story that alex would bring to session , it be easy for I just to nod my head while we kick the can down the road . " thirty be the new 20 , " alex would say , and as far as I could tell , she be right . work happen later , marriage happen later , kid happen later , even death happen later . twentysomething like alex and I have nothing but time .     but before long , my supervisor push I to push alex about her love life . I push back . I say , " sure , she be date down , she be sleep with a knucklehead , but it be not like she be go to marry the guy . " and then my supervisor say , " not yet , but she might marry the next one . besides , the good time to work on alex 's marriage be before she have one . "     that be what psychologist call an " aha ! " moment . that be the moment I realize , 30 be not the new 20 . yes , people settle down later than they use to , but that do not make alex 's 20 a developmental downtime . that make alex 's 20 a developmental sweet spot , and we be sit there , blow it . that be when I realize that this sort of benign neglect be a real problem , and it have real consequence , not just for alex and her love life but for the career and the family and the future of twentysomething everywhere .     there be 50 million twentysomething in the united states right now . we be talk about 15 percent of the population , or 100 percent if you consider that no one be get through adulthood without go through their 20 first .     ( laughter )     raise your hand if you be in your 20 . I really want to see some twentysomething here . oh , yay ! you be all awesome . if you work with twentysomething , you love a twentysomething , you be lose sleep over twentysomething , I want to see — okay . awesome , twentysomething really matter .     so , I specialize in twentysomething because I believe that every single one of those 50 million twentysomething deserve to know what psychologist , sociologist , neurologist and fertility specialist already know : that claim your 20 be one of the simple , yet most transformative , thing you can do for work , for love , for your happiness , maybe even for the world .     this be not my opinion . these be the fact . we know that 80 percent of life 's most defining moment take place by age 35 . that mean that eight out of 10 of the decision and experience and " aha ! " moment that make your life what it be will have happen by your mid-30 . people who be over 40 , do not panic . this crowd be go to be fine , I think . we know that the first 10 year of a career have an exponential impact on how much money you be go to earn . we know that more than half of americans be married or be live with or date their future partner by 30 . we know that the brain cap off its second and last growth spurt in your 20 as it rewire itself for adulthood , which mean that whatever it be you want to change about yourself , now be the time to change it . we know that personality change more during your 20 than at any other time in life , and we know that female fertility peak at age 28 , and thing get tricky after age 35 . so your 20 be the time to educate yourself about your body and your option .     so when we think about child development , we all know that the first five year be a critical period for language and attachment in the brain . it be a time when your ordinary , day - to - day life have an inordinate impact on who you will become . but what we hear less about be that there be such a thing as adult development , and our 20 be that critical period of adult development .     but this be not what twentysomething be hear . newspaper talk about the change timetable of adulthood . researcher call the 20 an extended adolescence . journalist coin silly nickname for twentysomething like " twixter " and " kidult . "     ( laugh ) it be true !     as a culture , we have trivialize what be actually the defining decade of adulthood .     leonard bernstein say that to achieve great thing , you need a plan and not quite enough time .     ( laugh ) be not that true ?     so what do you think happen when you pat a twentysomething on the head and you say , " you have 10 extra year to start your life " ? nothing happen . you have rob that person of his urgency and ambition , and absolutely nothing happen .     and then every day , smart , interesting twentysomething like you or like your son and daughter come into my office and say thing like this : " I know my boyfriend be no good for I , but this relationship do not count . I be just kill time . " or they say , " everybody say as long as I get start on a career by the time I be 30 , I 'll be fine . "     but then it start to sound like this : " my 20 be almost over , and I have nothing to show for myself . I have a well résumé the day after I graduate from college . " and then it start to sound like this : " date in my 20 be like musical chair . everybody be run around and have fun , but then sometime around 30 it be like the music turn off and everybody start sit down . I do not want to be the only one leave stand up , so sometimes I think I marry my husband because he be the close chair to I at 30 . "     where be the twentysomething here ? do not do that .     ( laughter )     okay , now that sound a little flip , but make no mistake , the stake be very high . when a lot have be push to your 30 , there be enormous thirtysomething pressure to jump - start a career , pick a city , partner up , and have two or three kid in a much short period of time . many of these thing be incompatible , and as research be just start to show , simply hard and more stressful to do all at once in our 30 .     the post - millennial midlife crisis be not buy a red sport car . it be realize you can not have that career you now want . it be realize you can not have that child you now want , or you can not give your child a sibling . too many thirtysomething and fortysomething look at themselves , and at I , sit across the room , and say about their 20 , " what be I do ? what be I think ? " I want to change what twentysomething be do and think .     here be a story about how that can go . it be a story about a woman name emma . at 25 , emma come to my office because she be , in her word , have an identity crisis . she say she think she might like to work in art or entertainment , but she have not decide yet , so she have spend the last few year wait table instead . because it be cheap , she live with a boyfriend who display his temper more than his ambition . and as hard as her 20 be , her early life have be even hard . she often cry in our session , but then would collect herself by say , " you can not pick your family , but you can pick your friend . "     well one day , emma come in and she hang her head in her lap , and she sob for most of the hour . she would just buy a new address book , and she have spend the morning fill in her many contact , but then she have be leave stare at that empty blank that come after the word " in case of emergency , please call ... " she be nearly hysterical when she look at I and say , " who be go to be there for I if I get in a car wreck ? who be go to take care of I if I have cancer ? "     now in that moment , it take everything I have not to say , " I will . " but what emma need be not some therapist who really , really care . emma need a well life , and I know this be her chance . I have learn too much since I first work with alex to just sit there while emma 's defining decade go parade by .     so over the next week and month , I tell emma three thing that every twentysomethe , male or female , deserve to hear .     first , I tell emma to forget about have an identity crisis and get some identity capital . by " get identity capital , " I mean do something that add value to who you be . do something that be an investment in who you might want to be next . I do not know the future of emma 's career , and no one know the future of work , but I do know this : identity capital beget identity capital . so now be the time for that cross - country job , that internship , that startup you want to try . I be not discount twentysomethe exploration here , but I be discount exploration that be not suppose to count , which , by the way , be not exploration . that be procrastination . I tell emma to explore work and make it count .     second , I tell emma that the urban tribe be overrate . good friend be great for give ride to the airport , but twentysomething who huddle together with like - minded peer limit who they know , what they know , how they think , how they speak , and where they work . that new piece of capital , that new person to date almost always come from outside the inner circle . new thing come from what be call our weak tie , our friend of friend of friend . so yes , half of twentysomething be un- or under - employ . but half be not , and weak tie be how you get yourself into that group . half of new job be never post , so reach out to your neighbor 's boss be how you get that unposted job . it be not cheat . it be the science of how information spread .     last but not least , emma believe that you can not pick your family , but you can pick your friend . now this be true for she grow up , but as a twentysomething , soon emma would pick her family when she partner with someone and create a family of her own . I tell emma the time to start pick your family be now .     now you may be think that 30 be actually a well time to settle down than 20 , or even 25 , and I agree with you . but grab whoever you be live with or sleep with when everyone on facebook start walk down the aisle be not progress . the good time to work on your marriage be before you have one , and that mean be as intentional with love as you be with work . pick your family be about consciously choose who and what you want rather than just make it work or kill time with whoever happen to be choose you .     so what happen to emma ? well , we go through that address book , and she find an old roommate 's cousin who work at an art museum in another state . that weak tie help she get a job there . that job offer give she the reason to leave that live - in boyfriend . now , five year later , she be a special event planner for museum . she be married to a man she mindfully choose . she love her new career , she love her new family , and she send I a card that say , " now the emergency contact blank do not seem big enough . "     now emma 's story make that sound easy , but that be what I love about work with twentysomething . they be so easy to help . twentysomething be like airplane just leave lax , bind for somewhere west . right after takeoff , a slight change in course be the difference between landing in alaska or fiji . likewise , at 21 or 25 or even 29 , one good conversation , one good break , one good ted talk , can have an enormous effect across year and even generation to come .     so here be an idea worth spread to every twentysomething you know . it be as simple as what I learn to say to alex . it be what I now have the privilege of say to twentysomething like emma every single day : thirty be not the new 20 , so claim your adulthood , get some identity capital , use your weak tie , pick your family . do not be define by what you do not know or do not do . you be decide your life right now .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   what would be a good end of life ? and I be talk about the very end . I be talk about die .     we all think a lot about how to live well . I would like to talk about increase our chance of die well . I be not a geriatrician . I design read program for preschooler . what I know about this topic come from a qualitative study with a sample size of two . in the last few year , I help two friend have the end of life they want . jim and shirley modini spend their 68 year of marriage live off the grid on their 1,700 - acre ranch in the mountain of sonoma county . they keep just enough livestock to make end meet so that the majority of their ranch would remain a refuge for the bear and lion and so many other thing that live there . this be their dream .     I meet jim and shirley in their 80 . they be both only child who choose not to have kid . as we become friend , I become their trustee and their medical advocate , but more importantly , I become the person who manage their end - of - life experience . and we learn a few thing about how to have a good end .     in their final year , jim and shirley face cancer , fracture , infection , neurological illness . it be true . at the end , our bodily function and independence be decline to zero . what we find be that , with a plan and the right people , quality of life can remain high . the beginning of the end be trigger by a mortality awareness event , and during this time , jim and shirley choose acr nature preserve to take their ranch over when they be go . this give they the peace of mind to move forward . it might be a diagnosis . it might be your intuition . but one day , you be go to say , " this thing be go to get I . " jim and shirley spend this time let friend know that their end be near and that they be okay with that .     die from cancer and die from neurological illness be different . in both case , last day be about quiet reassurance . jim die first . he be conscious until the very end , but on his last day he could not talk . through his eye , we know when he need to hear again , " it be all set , jim . we be go to take care of shirley right here at the ranch , and acr be go to take care of your wildlife forever . "     from this experience I be go to share five practice . I 've put worksheet online , so if you would like , you can plan your own end .     it start with a plan . most people say , " I would like to die at home . " eighty percent of americans die in a hospital or a nursing home . say we would like to die at home be not a plan . a lot of people say , " if I get like that , just shoot I . " this be not a plan either ; this be illegal . ( laughter ) a plan involve answer straightforward question about the end you want . where do you want to be when you be no long independent ? what do you want in term of medical intervention ? and who be go to make sure your plan be follow ?     you will need advocate . having more than one increase your chance of get the end you want . do not assume the natural choice be your spouse or child . you want someone who have the time and proximity to do this job well , and you want someone who can work with people under the pressure of an ever - change situation .     hospital readiness be critical . you be likely to be head to the emergency room , and you want to get this right . prepare a one - page summary of your medical history , medication and physician information . put this in a really bright envelope with copy of your insurance card , your power of attorney , and your do - not - resuscitate order . have advocate keep a set in their car . tape a set to your refrigerator . when you show up in the e.r . with this packet , your admission be streamline in a material way .     you be go to need caregiver . you 'll need to assess your personality and financial situation to determine whether an eld care community or stay at home be your good choice . in either case , do not settle . we go through a number of not - quite - right caregiver before we find the perfect team lead by marsha , who will not let you win at bingo just because you be die but will go out and take video of your ranch for you when you can not get out there , and caitlin , who will not let you skip your morning exercise but know when you need to hear that your wife be in good hand .     finally , last word . what do you want to hear at the very end , and from whom would you like to hear it ? in my experience , you 'll want to hear that whatever you be worried about be go to be fine . when you believe it be okay to let go , you will .     so , this be a topic that normally inspire fear and denial . what I 've learn be if we put some time into plan our end of life , we have the good chance of maintain our quality of life . here be jim and shirley just after decide who would take care of their ranch . here be jim just a few week before he die , celebrate a birthday he do not expect to see . and here be shirley just a few day before she died be read an article in that day 's paper about the significance of the wildlife refuge at the modini ranch .     jim and shirley have a good end of life , and by share their story with you , I hope to increase our chance of do the same .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   ( music )     ( applause )     thank you .     hi , everybody .     ban - gap - seum - ni - da .     I would like to share with you a little bit of I play my life .     I might look successful and happy be in front of you today , but I once suffer from severe depression and be in total despair . the violin , which mean everything to I , become a grave burden on I . although many people try to comfort and encourage I , their word sound like meaningless noise . when I be just about to give everything up after year of suffering , I start to rediscover the true power of music .     ( music )     in the midst of hardship , it be the music that give I — that restore my soul . the comfort the music give I be just indescribable , and it be a real eye - opening experience for I too , and it totally change my perspective on life and set I free from the pressure of become a successful violinist .     do you feel like you be all alone ? I hope that this piece will touch and heal your heart , as it do for I .     ( music )     ( applause )     thank you .     now , I use my music to reach people 's heart and have find there be no boundary . my audience be anyone who be here to listen , even those who be not familiar with classical music . I not only play at the prestigious classical concert hall like carnegie hall and kennedy center , but also hospital , church , prison , and restrict facility for leprosy patient , just to mention a few .     now , with my last piece , I would like to show you that classical music can be so much fun , exciting , and that it can rock you . let I introduce you to my brand new project , " baroque in rock , " which become a golden disc most recently . it be such an honor for I .     I think , while I be enjoy my life as a happy musician , I be earn a lot more recognition than I 've ever imagine . but it be now your turn . change your perspective will not only transform you but also the whole world . just play your life with all you have , and share it with the world . I really look forward to witness a transform world by you , tedster . play your life , and stay tune .     ( music )     ( applause )  
   so I be train to become a gymnast for two year in hunan , china in the 1970 . when I be in the first grade , the government want to transfer I to a school for athlete , all expense pay . but my tiger mother say , " no . " my parent want I to become an engineer like they . after survive the cultural revolution , they firmly believe there be only one sure way to happiness : a safe and well - pay job . it be not important if I like the job or not .     but my dream be to become a chinese opera singer . that be I play my imaginary piano . an opera singer must start train young to learn acrobatic , so I try everything I could to go to opera school . I even write to the school principal and the host of a radio show . but no adult like the idea . no adult believe I be serious . only my friend support I , but they be kid , just as powerless as I be . so at age 15 , I know I be too old to be train . my dream would never come true . I be afraid that for the rest of my life some second - class happiness would be the good I could hope for .     but that be so unfair . so I be determined to find another calling . nobody around to teach I ? fine . I turn to book .     I satisfy my hunger for parental advice from this book by a family of writer and musicians.["correspondence in the family of fou lei " ]     I find my role model of an independent woman when confucian tradition require obedience.["jane eyre " ]     and I learn to be efficient from this book.["cheaper by the dozen " ]     and I be inspire to study abroad after read these .     [ " complete work of sanmao " ( aka echo chan ) ] [ " lesson from history " by nan huaijin ]     I come to the u.s . in 1995 , so which book do I read here first ? book ban in china , of course . " the good earth " be about chinese peasant life . that be just not convenient for propaganda . get it . the bible be interesting , but strange . ( laughter ) that be a topic for a different day . but the fifth commandment give I an epiphany : " you shall honor your father and mother . " " honor , " I say . " that be so different , and well , than obey . " so it become my tool to climb out of this confucian guilt trap and to restart my relationship with my parent .     encounter a new culture also start my habit of comparative reading . it offer many insight . for example , I find this map out of place at first because this be what chinese student grow up with . it have never occur to I , china do not have to be at the center of the world . a map actually carry somebody 's view . comparative reading actually be nothing new . it be a standard practice in the academic world . there be even research field such as comparative religion and comparative literature .     compare and contrast give scholar a more complete understanding of a topic . so I think , well , if comparative reading work for research , why not do it in daily life too ? so I start read book in pair . so they can be about people — [ " benjamin franklin " by walter isaacson]["john adams " by david mccullough ] — who be involve in the same event , or friend with share experience . [ " personal history " by katharine graham]["the snowball : warren buffett and the business of life , " by alice schroeder ] I also compare the same story in different genre — ( laughter ) [ holy bible : king james version]["lamb " by chrisopher moore ] — or similar story from different culture , as joseph campbell do in his wonderful book.["the power of myth " by joseph campbell ] for example , both the christ and the buddha go through three temptation . for the christ , the temptation be economic , political and spiritual . for the buddha , they be all psychological : lust , fear and social duty — interesting .     so if you know a foreign language , it be also fun to read your favorite book in two language . [ " the way of chuang tzu " thomas merton]["tao : the watercourse way " alan watts ] instead of lose in translation , I find there be much to gain . for example , it be through translation that I realize " happiness " in chinese literally mean " fast joy . " huh ! " bride " in chinese literally mean " new mother . " uh - oh . ( laughter )     book have give I a magic portal to connect with people of the past and the present . I know I shall never feel lonely or powerless again . have a dream shatter really be nothing compare to what many other have suffer . I have come to believe that come true be not the only purpose of a dream . its most important purpose be to get we in touch with where dream come from , where passion come from , where happiness come from . even a shattered dream can do that for you .     so because of book , I be here today , happy , live again with a purpose and a clarity , most of the time . so may book be always with you .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you . ( applause )     thank you . ( applause )  
   well , now we be go to the bahama to meet a remarkable group of dolphin that I 've be work with in the wild for the last 28 year .     now I be interested in dolphin because of their large brain and what they might be do with all that brainpower in the wild . and we know they use some of that brainpower for just live complicated life , but what do we really know about dolphin intelligence ?     well , we know a few thing . we know that their brain - to - body ratio , which be a physical measure of intelligence , be second only to human . cognitively , they can understand artificially - create language . and they pass self - awareness test in mirror . and in some part of the world , they use tool , like sponge to hunt fish . but there be one big question leave : do they have a language , and if so , what be they talk about ?     so decade ago , not year ago , I set out to find a place in the world where I could observe dolphin underwater to try to crack the code of their communication system . now in most part of the world , the water 's pretty murky , so it be very hard to observe animal underwater , but I find a community of dolphin that live in these beautiful , clear , shallow sandbank of the bahama which be just east of florida . and they spend their daytime resting and socialize in the safety of the shallow , but at night , they go off the edge and hunt in deep water .     now , it be not a bad place to be a researcher , either . so we go out for about five month every summer in a 20 - meter catamaran , and we live , sleep and work at sea for week at a time . my main tool be an underwater video with a hydrophone , which be an underwater microphone , and this be so I can correlate sound and behavior . and most of our work 's pretty non - invasive . we try to follow dolphin etiquette while we be in the water , since we be actually observe they physically in the water . now , atlantic spot dolphin be a really nice specie to work with for a couple of reason . they be bear without spot , and they get spot with age , and they go through pretty distinct developmental phase , so that be fun to track their behavior . and by about the age of 15 , they be fully spot black and white .     now the mother you see here be mugsy . she be 35 year old in this shot , but dolphin can actually live into their early 50 . and like all the dolphin in our community , we photograph mugsy and track her little spot and nick in her dorsal fin , and also the unique spot pattern as she mature over time .     now , young dolphin learn a lot as they be grow up , and they use their teenage year to practice social skill , and at about the age of nine , the female become sexually mature , so they can get pregnant , and the male mature quite a bit later , at around 15 year of age . and dolphin be very promiscuous , and so we have to determine who the father be , so we do paternity test by collect fecal material out of the water and extract dna . so what that mean be , after 28 year , we be track three generation , include grandmother and grandfather . now , dolphin be natural acoustician . they make sound 10 time as high and hear sound 10 time as high as we do . but they have other communication signal they use . they have good vision , so they use body posture to communicate . they have taste , not smell . and they have touch . and sound can actually be feel in the water , because the acoustic impedance of tissue and water 's about the same . so dolphin can buzz and tickle each other at a distance .     now , we do know some thing about how sound be use with certain behavior . now , the signature whistle be a whistle that be specific to an individual dolphin , and it be like a name . ( dolphin whistle noise ) and this be the well - study sound , because it be easy to measure , really , and you would find this whistle when mother and calf be reunite , for example .     another well studied sound be echolocation click . this be the dolphin 's sonar . ( dolphin echolocation noise ) and they use these click to hunt and feed . but they can also tightly pack these click together into buzz and use they socially . for example , male will stimulate a female during a courtship chase . you know , I 've be buzz in the water . ( laughter ) do not tell anyone . it be a secret . and you can really feel the sound . that be my point with that . ( laughter )     so dolphin be also political animal , so they have to resolve conflict . ( dolphin noises ) and they use these burst - pulse sound as well as their head - to - head behavior when they be fight . and these be very unstudied sound because they be hard to measure .     now this be some video of a typical dolphin fight . ( dolphin noises ) so you be go to see two group , and you be go to see the head - to - head posturing , some open mouth , lot of squawking . there be a bubble . and basically , one of these group will kind of back off and everything will resolve fine , and it do not really escalate into violence too much .     now , in the bahama , we also have resident bottlenose that interact socially with the spot dolphin . for example , they babysit each other 's calf . the male have dominance display that they use when they be chase each other 's female . and the two specie actually form temporary alliance when they be chase shark away . and one of the mechanism they use to communicate their coordination be synchrony . they synchronize their sound and their body posture to look big and sound strong . ( dolphin noise ) now , these be bottlenose dolphin , and you 'll see they start to synchronize their behavior and their sound . ( dolphin noises ) you see , they be synchronize with their partner as well as the other dyad . I wish I be that coordinated .     now , it be important to remember that you be only hear the human - audible part of dolphin sound , and dolphin make ultrasonic sound , and we use special equipment in the water to collect these sound . now , researcher have actually measure whistle complexity use information theory , and whistle rate very high relative to even human language . but burst - pulse sound be a bit of a mystery .     now , these be three spectragram . two be human word , and one be a dolphin vocalize . so just take a guess in your mind which one be the dolphin . now , it turn out burst - pulse sound actually look a bit like human phoneme .     now , one way to crack the code be to interpret these signal and figure out what they mean , but it be a difficult job , and we actually do not have a rosetta stone yet . but a second way to crack the code be to develop some technology , an interface to do two - way communication , and that be what we 've be try to do in the bahama and in real time . now , scientist have use keyboard interface to try to bridge the gap with specie include chimpanzee and dolphin . this underwater keyboard in orlando , florida , at the epcot center , be actually the most sophisticated ever two - way interface design for human and dolphin to work together under the water and exchange information . so we want to develop an interface like this in the bahama , but in a more natural setting . and one of the reason we think we could do this be because the dolphin be start to show we a lot of mutual curiosity . they be spontaneously mimic our vocalization and our posture , and they be also invite we into dolphin game . now , dolphin be social mammal , so they love to play , and one of their favorite game be to drag seaweed , or sargassum in this case , around . and they be very adept . they like to drag it and drop it from appendage to appendage . now in this footage , the adult be caroh . she be 25 year old here , and this be her newborn , cobalt , and he be just learn how to play this game . ( dolphin noises ) she be kind of tease he and taunt he . he really want that sargassum . now , when dolphin solicit human for this game , they 'll often sink vertically in the water , and they 'll have a little sargassum on their flipper , and they 'll sort of nudge it and drop it sometimes on the bottom and let we go get it , and then we 'll have a little seaweed keep away game . but when we do not dive down and get it , they 'll bring it to the surface and they 'll sort of wave it in front of we on their tail and drop it for we like they do their calf , and then we 'll pick it up and have a game .     and so we start think , well , would not it be neat to build some technology that would allow the dolphin to request these thing in real time , their favorite toy ? so the original vision be to have a keyboard hang from the boat attach to a computer , and the diver and dolphin would activate the key on the keypad and happily exchange information and request toy from each other . but we quickly find out that dolphin simply be not go to hang around the boat use a keyboard . they 've get well thing to do in the wild . they might do it in captivity , but in the wild —     so we build a portable keyboard that we could push through the water , and we label four object they like to play with , the scarf , rope , sargassum , and also have a bow ride , which be a fun activity for a dolphin . ( whistle ) and that be the scarf whistle , which be also associate with a visual symbol . and these be artificially create whistle . they be outside the dolphin 's normal repertoire , but they be easily mimic by the dolphin . and I spend four year with my colleague adam pack and fabienne delfour , work out in the field with this keyboard use it with each other to do request for toy while the dolphin be watch . and the dolphin could get in on the game . they could point at the visual object , or they could mimic the whistle .     now this be video of a session . the diver here have a rope toy , and I be on the keyboard on the left , and I 've just play the rope key , and that be the request for the toy from the human . so I 've get the rope , I be diving down , and I be basically try to get the dolphin 's attention , because they be kind of like little kid . you have to keep their attention . I be go to drop the rope , see if they come over . here they come , and then they be go to pick up the rope and drag it around as a toy . now , I be at the keyboard on the left , and this be actually the first time that we try this . I be go to try to request this toy , the rope toy , from the dolphin use the rope sound . let us see if they might actually understand what that mean . ( whistle ) that be the rope whistle . up come the dolphin , and drop off the rope , yay . wow .     ( applause )     so this be only once . we do not know for sure if they really understand the function of the whistle . okay , so here be a second toy in the water . this be a scarf toy , and I be try to lead the dolphin over to the keyboard to show she the visual and the acoustic signal . now this dolphin , we call she " the scarf thief , " because over the year she be abscond with about 12 scarf . in fact , we think she have a boutique somewhere in the bahama . so I be reach over . she be get the scarf on her right side . and we try to not touch the animal too much , we really do not want to over - habituate they . and I be try to lead she back to the keyboard . and the diver there be go to activate the scarf sound to request the scarf . so I try to give she the scarf . whoop . almost lose it . but this be the moment where everything become possible . the dolphin 's at the keyboard . you 've get full attention . and this sometimes go on for hour . and I want to share this video with you not to show you any big breakthrough , because they have not happen yet , but to show you the level of intention and focus that these dolphin have , and interest in the system .     and because of this , we really decide we need some more sophisticated technology . so we join force with georgia tech , with thad starner 's wearable computing group , to build we an underwater wearable computer that we be call chat . [ chat : cetacean hearing and telemetry ] now , instead of push a keyboard through the water , the diver be wear the complete system , and it be acoustic only , so basically the diver activate the sound on a keypad on the forearm , the sound go out through an underwater speaker , if a dolphin mimic the whistle or a human play the whistle , the sound come in and be localize by two hydrophone . the computer can localize who request the toy if there be a word match . and the real power of the system be in the real - time sound recognition , so we can respond to the dolphin quickly and accurately .     and we be at prototype stage , but this be how we hope it will play out . so diver a and diver b both have a wearable computer and the dolphin hear the whistle as a whistle , the diver hear the whistle as a whistle in the water , but also as a word through bone conduction . so diver a play the scarf whistle or diver b play the sargassum whistle to request a toy from whoever have it . what we hope will happen be that the dolphin mimic the whistle , and if diver a have the sargassum , if that be the sound that be play and request , then the diver will give the sargassum to the request dolphin and they 'll swim away happily into the sunset playing sargassum for forever .     now , how far can this kind of communication go ? well , chat be design specifically to empower the dolphin to request thing from we . it be design to really be two - way . now , will they learn to mimic the whistle functionally ? we hope so and we think so . but as we decode their natural sound , we be also plan to put those back into the computerized system . for example , right now we can put their own signature whistle in the computer and request to interact with a specific dolphin . likewise , we can create our own whistle , our own whistle name , and let the dolphin request specific diver to interact with .     now it may be that all our mobile technology will actually be the same technology that help we communicate with another specie down the road . in the case of a dolphin , you know , it be a species that , well , they be probably close to our intelligence in many way and we might not be able to admit that right now , but they live in quite a different environment , and you still have to bridge the gap with the sensory system .     I mean , imagine what it would be like to really understand the mind of another intelligent specie on the planet .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   everything be interconnect . as a shinnecock indian , I be raise to know this . we be a small fishing tribe situate on the southeastern tip of long island near the town of southampton in new york .     when I be a little girl , my grandfather take I to sit outside in the sun on a hot summer day . there be no cloud in the sky . and after a while I begin to perspire . and he point up to the sky , and he say , " look , do you see that ? that be part of you up there . that be your water that help to make the cloud that become the rain that feed the plant that feed the animal . "     in my continued exploration of subject in nature that have the ability to illustrate the interconnection of all life , I start storm chase in 2008 after my daughter say , " mom , you should do that . "     and so three day later , drive very fast , I find myself stalk a single type of giant cloud call the super cell , capable of produce grapefruit - size hail and spectacular tornado , although only two percent actually do . these cloud can grow so big , up to 50 mile wide and reach up to 65,000 foot into the atmosphere . they can grow so big , block all daylight , make it very dark and ominous standing under they .     storm chasing be a very tactile experience . there be a warm , moist wind blow at your back and the smell of the earth , the wheat , the grass , the charge particle . and then there be the color in the cloud of hail form , the green and the turquoise blue . I 've learn to respect the lightning . my hair use to be straight .     ( laughter )     I be just kid .     ( laughter )     what really excite I about these storm be their movement , the way they swirl and spin and undulate , with their lava lamp - like mammatus cloud . they become lovely monster .     when I be photograph they , I can not help but remember my grandfather 's lesson . as I stand under they , I see not just a cloud , but understand that what I have the privilege to witness be the same force , the same process in a small - scale version that help to create our galaxy , our solar system , our sun and even this very planet .     all my relation . thank you .     ( applause )  
miranda wang : we be here to talk about accident . how do you feel about accident ? when we think about accident , we usually consider they to be harmful , unfortunate or even dangerous , and they certainly can be . but be they always that bad ? the discovery that have lead to penicillin , for example , be one of the most fortunate accident of all time . without biologist alexander fleming 's moldy accident , cause by a neglected workstation , we would not be able to fight off so many bacterial infection . jeanny yao : miranda and I be here today because we would like to share how our accident have lead to discovery . in 2011 , we visit the vancouver waste transfer station and see an enormous pit of plastic waste . we realize that when plastic get to the dump , it be difficult to sort they because they have similar density , and when they be mix with organic matter and construction debris , it be truly impossible to pick they out and environmentally eliminate they . mw : however , plastic be useful because they be durable , flexible , and can be easily mold into so many useful shape . the downside of this convenience be that there be a high cost to this . plastic cause serious problem , such as the destruction of ecosystem , the pollution of natural resource , and the reduction of available land space . this picture you see here be the great pacific gyre . when you think about plastic pollution and the marine environment , we think about the great pacific gyre , which be suppose to be a float island of plastic waste . but that be no long an accurate depiction of plastic pollution in the marine environment . right now , the ocean be actually a soup of plastic debris , and there be nowhere you can go in the ocean where you would not be able to find plastic particle . jy : in a plastic - dependent society , cut down production be a good goal , but it be not enough . and what about the waste that be already be produce ? plastic take hundred to thousand of year to biodegrade . so we think , you know what ? instead of wait for that garbage to sit there and pile up , let us find a way to break they down with bacteria . sound cool , right ? audience : yeah . jy : thank you . but we have a problem . you see , plastic have very complex structure and be difficult to biodegrade . anyhow , we be curious and hopeful and still want to give it a go . mw : with this idea in mind , jeanny and I read through some hundred of scientific article on the internet , and we draft a research proposal in the beginning of our grade 12 year . we aim to find bacteria from our local fraser river that can degrade a harmful plasticizer call phthalate . phthalate be additive use in everyday plastic product to increase their flexibility , durability and transparency . although they be part of the plastic , they be not covalently bond to the plastic backbone . as a result , they easily escape into our environment . not only do phthalate pollute our environment , but they also pollute our body . to make the matter bad , phthalate be find in product to which we have a high exposure , such as baby ' toy , beverage container , cosmetic , and even food wrap . phthalate be horrible because they be so easily take into our body . they can be absorb by skin contact , ingest , and inhale . jy : every year , at least 470 million pound of phthalate contaminate our air , water and soil . the environmental protection agency even classify this group as a top - priority pollutant because it be be show to cause cancer and birth defect by act as a hormone disruptor . we read that each year , the vancouver municipal government monitor phthalate concentration level in river to assess their safety . so we figure , if there be place along our fraser river that be contaminate with phthalate , and if there be bacteria that be able to live in these area , then perhaps , perhaps these bacteria could have evolve to break down phthalate . mw : so we present this good idea to dr . lindsay eltis at the university of british columbia , and surprisingly , he actually take we into his lab and ask his graduate student adam and james to help we . little do we know at that time that a trip to the dump and some research on the internet and pluck up the courage to act upon inspiration would take we on a life - change journey of accident and discovery . jy : the first step in our project be to collect soil sample from three different site along the fraser river . out of thousand of bacteria , we want to find one that could break down phthalate , so we enrich our culture with phthalate as the only carbon source . this imply that , if anything grow in our culture , then they must be able to live off of phthalate . everything go well from there , and we become amazing scientist . ( laughter ) mw : um ... uh , jeanny . jy : I be just joke . mw : okay . well , it be partially my fault . you see , I accidentally crack the flask that have contain our third enrichment culture , and as a result , we have to wipe down the incubator room with bleach and ethanol twice . and this be only one of the example of the many accident that happen during our experimentation . but this mistake turn out to be rather serendipitous . we notice that the unharmed culture come from place of opposite contamination level , so this mistake actually lead we to think that perhaps we can compare the different degradative potential of bacteria from site of opposite contamination level . jy : now that we grow the bacteria , we want to isolate strain by streak onto mediate plate , because we think that would be less accident - prone , but we be wrong again . we poke hole in our agar while streak and contaminate some sample and funghi . as a result , we have to streak and restreak several time . then we monitor phthalate utilization and bacterial growth , and find that they share an inverse correlation , so as bacterial population increase , phthalate concentration decrease . this mean that our bacteria be actually live off of phthalate . mw : so now that we find bacteria that could break down phthalate , we wonder what these bacteria be . so jeanny and I take three of our most efficient strain and then perform gene amplification sequence on they and match our datum with an online comprehensive database . we be happy to see that , although our three strain have be previously identify bacteria , two of they be not previously associate with phthalate degradation , so this be actually a novel discovery . jy : to well understand how this biodegradation work , we want to verify the catabolic pathway of our three strain . to do this , we extract enzyme from our bacteria and react with an intermediate of phthalic acid . mw : we monitor this experiment with spectrophotometry and obtain this beautiful graph . this graph show that our bacteria really do have a genetic pathway to biodegrade phthalate . our bacteria can transform phthalate , which be a harmful toxin , into end product such as carbon dioxide , water and alcohol . I know some of you in the crowd be think , well , carbon dioxide be horrible , it be a greenhouse gas . but if our bacteria do not evolve to break down phthalate , they would have use some other kind of carbon source , and aerobic respiration would have lead it to have end product such as carbon dioxide anyway . we be also interested to see that , although we 've obtain great diversity of bacteria biodegrader from the bird habitat site , we obtain the most efficient degrader from the landfill site . so this fully show that nature evolve through natural selection . jy : so miranda and I share this research at the sanofi biogeneius challenge competition and be recognize with the great commercialization potential . although we be not the first one to find bacteria that can break down phthalate , we be the first one to look into our local river and find a possible solution to a local problem . we have not only show that bacteria can be the solution to plastic pollution , but also that be open to uncertain outcome and take risk create opportunity for unexpected discovery . throughout this journey , we have also discover our passion for science , and be currently continue research on other fossil fuel chemical in university . we hope that in the near future , we 'll be able to create model organism that can break down not only phthalate but a wide variety of different contaminant . we can apply this to wastewater treatment plant to clean up our river and other natural resource . and perhaps one day we 'll be able to tackle the problem of solid plastic waste . mw : I think our journey have truly transform our view of microorganism , and jeanny and I have show that even mistake can lead to discovery . einstein once say , " you can not solve problem by use the same kind of thinking you use when you create they . " if we be make plastic synthetically , then we think the solution would be to break they down biochemically . thank you . jy : thank you . ( applause )
   I love paper , and I love technology , and what I do be I make paper interactive . and that be what I say when people ask I what I do , but it really confuse most people , so really , the good way for I to convey it be to take the technology and be creative and create experience . so I try to think what I could use for here , and a couple of week ago I have a crazy idea that I want to print two dj deck and to try and mix some music . and I be go to try and show that at the end , and the suspense will be as much mine if it work . and I be not a dj , and I be not a musician , so I be a little bit scared of that . so I think , I find the good way to describe my journey be just to mention a few little thing that have happen to I throughout my life . there be three particular thing that I 've do , and I 'll just describe those first , and then talk about some of my work . so when I be a kid , I be obsess with wire , and I use to thread they under my carpet and thread they behind the wall and have little switch and little speaker , and I want to make my bedroom be interactive but kind of all hide away . and I be also really interested in wireless as well . so I buy one of those little kit that you could get to make a radio transmitter , and I get an old book and I carve out the inside and I hide it inside there , and then I place it next to my dad and snuck back to my bedroom and tune in on the radio so I could eavesdrop . I be not at all interested in what he be say . it be more that I just like the idea of an everyday object have something inside and do something different . several year later , I manage to successfully fail all of my exam and do not really leave school with much to show for at all , and my parent , maybe as a reward , buy I what turn out to be a one - way ticket to australia , and I come back home about four year later . I end up on a farm in the middle of nowhere . it be in far western new south wale . and this farm be 120,000 acre . there be 22,000 sheep , and it be about 40 degree , or 100 or so fahrenheit . and on this farm there be the farmer , his wife , and there be the four - year - old daughter . and they kind of take I into the farm and show I what it be like to live and work . obviously , one of the most important thing be the sheep , and so my job be , well , pretty much to do everything , but it be about bring the sheep back to the homestead . and we would do that by build fence , use motorbike and horse , and the sheep would make their you all the way back to the shearing shed for the different season . and what I learn be , although at the time , like everyone else , I think sheep be pretty stupid because they do not do what we want they to do , what I realize now , probably only just in the last few week look back , be the sheep be not stupid at all . we would put they in an environment where they do not want to be , and they do not want to do what we want they to do . so the challenge be to try and get they to do what we want they to do by listen to the weather , the lay of the land , and create thing that would let the sheep flow and go where we want they to go . another bunch of year later , I end up at cambridge university at the cavendish laboratory in the u.k . do a ph.d . in physics . my ph.d . be to move electron around , one at a time . and I realize — again , it be kind of these realization look back as to what I do — I realize now that it be pretty much the same as move sheep around . it really be . it be just you do it by change an environment . and that be kind of be a big lesson to I , that you can not act on any object . you change its environment , and the object will flow . so we make it very small , so thing be about 30 nanometer in size ; make it very cold , so at liquid helium temperature ; and change environment by change the voltage , and the electron could make flow around a loop one at a time , on and off , a little memory node . and I want to go one step far , and I want to move one electron on and one electron off . and I be tell that I would not be able to do this , which , you know , as we 've hear from other people , that be the thing that make you do it . and I be determine , and I manage to show that I could do that . and a lot of that learning , I think , come from be on that farm , because when I be work on the farm , we would have to use what be around we , we would have to use the environment , and there be no such thing as something can not be do , because you be in an environment where , if you can not do what you need to do , you can die , and , you know , I have see that sort of thing happen . so now my obsession be print , and I be really fascinate by the idea of use conventional printing process , so the type of print that be use to create many of the thing around we to make paper and card interactive . when I speak to some printer when I start do this and tell they what I want to do , which be to print conductive ink onto paper , they tell I it could not be do , again , that kind of favorite thing . so I get about 10 credit card and loan and get myself very close to bankruptcy , really , and buy myself this huge printing press , which I have no idea how to use at all . it be about five meter long , and I cover myself and the floor with ink and make a massive mess , but I learn to print . and then I take it back to the printer and show they what I 've do , and they be like , " of course you can do that . why do not you come here in the first place ? " that be always the case . so what we do be we take conventional printing press , we make conductive ink , and run those through a press , and basically just let hundred of thousand of electron flow through piece of paper so we can make that paper interactive . and it be pretty simple , really . it be just a collection of thing that have be do before , but bring they together in a different way . so we have a piece of paper with conductive ink on , and then add onto that a small circuit board with a couple of chip , one to run some capacitive touch software , so we know where we 've touch it , and the other to run , quite often , some wireless software so the piece of paper can connect . so I 'll just describe a couple of thing that we 've create . there be lot of different thing we 've create . this be one of they , because I love cake . and this one , it be a large poster , and you touch it and it have a little speaker behind it , and the poster talk to you when you touch it and ask you a series of question , and it work out your perfect cake . but it do not tell you the cake there and then . it upload a picture , and the reason why it choose that cake for you , to our facebook page and to twitter . so we be try to create that connection between the physical and the digital , but have it not look on a screen , and just look like a regular poster . we 've work with a bunch of university on a project look at interactive newsprint . so for example , we 've create a newspaper , a regular newspaper . you can wear a pair of headphone that be connect to it wirelessly , and when you touch it , you can hear the music that be describe on the top , which be something you can not read . you can hear a press conference as well as read what the editor have determine that press conference be about . and you can press a facebook " like " button or you can vote on something as well . something else that we create , and this be an idea that I have a couple of year ago , and so we 've do a project on this . it be for funding from the government for user - center design for energy - efficient building , difficult to say , and something I have no idea what it be when I go into the workshop , but quickly learn . and we want to try and encourage people to use energy well . and I really like the idea that , instead of look at dial and read thing to say — look at your energy usage , I want to create a poster that be wirelessly connect and have color - change ink on it , and so if your energy usage be trend well , than the leave would appear and the rabbit would appear and all would be good . and if it be not , then there would be graffiti and the leave would fall off the tree . so it be try to make you look after something in your immediate environment , which you do not want to see not look so good , rather than expect people to do thing in the local environment because of the effect that it have a long way off . and I think , kind of like go back to the farm , it be about how to let people do what you want they to do rather than make people do what you want they to do . okay . so this be the bit I be really scared of . so a couple of thing I 've create be , there be a poster over here that you can play drum on . and I be not a musician . it seem like a good idea at the time . if anyone want to try and play drum , then they can . I 'll just describe how this work . this poster be wirelessly connect to my cell phone , and when you touch it , it connect to the app . ( drum ) and it have really good response time . it be use bluetooth 4 , so it be pretty instantaneous . okay . thank . ( applause ) and there be a couple of other thing . so this one be like a sound board , so you can touch it , and I just love these horrible noise . ( siren , explosion , breaking glass ) okay , and this be a d.j . turntable . so it be wirelessly link to my ipad , and this be a software that be run on the ipad . oh , yes . I just love do that . I be not a d.j . , though , but I just always want to do that . ( scratch ) so I have a crossfader , and I have the two deck . so I 've make some new technology , and I love thing be creative , and I love work with creative people . so my 15 - year - old niece , she be amazing , and she be call charlotte , and I ask she to record something , and I work with a friend call elliot to put some beat together . so this be my niece , charlotte . ( music ) yay ! ( applause ) so that be pretty much what I do . I just love bring technology together , have a lot of fun , be creative . but it be not about the technology . it be just about , I want to create some great experience . so thank you very much . ( applause )  
   ( music ) [ " oedipus rex " ] [ " the lion king " ] [ " titus " ] [ " frida " ] [ " the magic flute " ] [ " across the universe " ] ( applause ) julie taymor : thank you . thank you very much . that be a few sample of the theater , opera and film that I have do over the last 20 year . but what I would like to begin with right now be to take you back to a moment that I go through in indonesia , which be a seminal moment in my life and , like all myth , these story need to be retell and tell , lest we forget they . and when I be in the turbulent time , as we know , that I be right now , through the crucible and the fire of transformation , which be what all of you do , actually . anybody who create know there be that point where it have not quite become the phoenix or the burn char . ( laughter ) and I be right there on the edge , which I 'll tell you about , another story . I want to go back to indonesia where I be about 21 , 22 year , a long time ago , on a fellowship . and I find myself , after two year there and perform and learn , on the island of bali , on the edge of a crater , gunung batur . and I be in a village where there be an initiation ceremony for the young man , a rite of passage . little do I know that it be mine as well . and as I sit in this temple square under this gigantic beringin banyan tree , in the dark , there be no electricity , just the full moon , down in this empty square , and I hear the most beautiful sound , like a charles ive concert as I listen to the gamelan music from all the different villager that come for this once - every - five - year ceremony . and I think I be alone in the dark under this tree . and all of a sudden , out of the dark , from the other end of the square , I see the glint of mirror light by the moon . and these 20 old man who I have see before all of a sudden stand up in these full warrior costume with the headdress and the spear , and no one be in the square , and I be hide in the shadow . no one be there , and they come out , and they do this incredible dance . " huhuhuhuhuhuhuhahahahaha . " and they move their body and they come forward , and the light bounce off these costume . and I 've be in theater since I be 11 year old , and perform , create , and I go , " who be they perform for with these elaborate costume , these extraordinary headdress ? " and I realize that they be perform for god , whatever that mean . but somehow , it do not matter about the publicity . there be no money involve . it be not go to be write down . it be no news . and there be these incredible artist that feel for I like an eternity as they perform . the next moment , as soon as they finish and disappear into the shadow , a young man with a propane lantern come on , hang it up on a tree , set up a curtain . the village square be fill with hundred of people . and they put on an opera all night long . human being need the light . they need the light to see . so what I gain and gather from this incredible , seminal moment in my life as a young artist be that you must be true to what you believe as an artist all the way through , but you also have to be aware that the audience be out there in our life at this time , and they also need the light . and it be this incredible balance that I think that we walk when we be create something that be break ground , that be try to do something you 've never see before , that imaginary world where you actually do not know where you be go to end up , that be the fine line on the edge of a crater that I have walk my whole life . what I would like to do now be to tell you a little bit about how I work . let us take " the lion king . " you see many example of my work up there , but it be one that people know . I start with the notion of the ideograph . an ideograph be like a brush painting , a japanese brush painting . three stroke , you get the whole bamboo forest . I go to the concept of " the lion king " and I say , " what be the essence of it ? what be the abstraction ? if I be to reduce this entire story into one image , what would it be ? " the circle . the circle . it be so obvious . the circle of life . the circle of mufasa 's mask . the circle that , when we come to act ii and there be a drought , how do you express drought ? it be a circle of silk on the floor that disappear into the hole in the stage floor . the circle of life come in the wheel of the gazelle that leap . and you see the mechanic . and be a theater person , what I know and love about the theater be that when the audience come in and they suspend their disbelief , when you see man walk or woman walk with a platter of grass on their head , you know it be the savanna . you do not question that . I love the apparent truth of theater . I love that people be willing to fill in the blank . the audience be willing to say , " oh , I know that be not a real sun . you take piece of stick . you add silk to the bottom . you suspend these piece . you let it fall flat on the floor . and as it rise with the string , I see that it be a sun . but the beauty of it be that it be just silk and stick . and in a way , that be what make it spiritual . that be what move you . it be not the actual literal sunrise that be come . it be the art of it . so in the theater , as much as the story be critical and the book and the language , the telling of the story , how it be tell , the mechanic , the method that you use , be equal to the story itself . and I be one who love high tech and low tech . so I could go from — for instance , I 'll show you some " spider - man " later , these incredible machine that move people along . but the fact be , without the dancer who know how to use his body and swing on those wire , it be nothing . so now I be go to show you some clip from the other big project of my life this year , " the temp . " it be a movie . I do " the tempest " on a stage three time in the theater since 1984 , ' 86 , and I love the play . I do it always with a male prospero . and all of a sudden , I think , " well , who be I going to get to play prospero ? why not helen mirren ? she be a great actor . why not ? " and this material really do work for a woman equally as well . so now , let us take a look at some of the image from " the temp . " ( music ) ( video ) prospera : hast thou , spirit , perform to the point the tempest that I bid thee ? ariel : I board the king 's ship . in every cabin , I flame amazement . prospera : at first sight , they have change eye . miranda : do you love I ? ferdinand : you all limit . hm : they be both in either 's power . trinculo : misery acquaint a man with strange bedfellow . ( music ) look for business , governor ? caliban : hast thou not drop from heaven ? stephano : out of the moon , I do assure thee . prospera : caliban ! caliban : this island be mine . prospera : for this , be sure , tonight thou shalt have cramp . antonio : here lie your brother no well than the earth he lie upon . sebastian : draw thy sword . and I , the king , shall love thee . prospera : I will plague they all , even to roar . ariel : I have make you mad . prospera : we be such stuff as dream be make on . and our little life be round with a sleep . ( music ) jt : okay . ( applause ) so I go from theater , do " the tempest " on the stage in a very low - budget production many year ago , and I love the play , and I also think it be shakespeare 's last play , and it really lend itself , as you can see , to cinema . but I be just go to give you a little example about how one stage it in theater and then how one take that same idea or story and move it into cinema . the ideograph that I talk to you about before , what be it for " the temp " ? what , if I be to boil it down , would be the one image that I could hang my hat on for this ? and it be the sand castle , the idea of nurture versus nature , that we build these civilization — she speak about it at the end , helen mirren 's prospera — we build they , but under nature , under the grand tempest , these cloud - cap tower , these gorgeous palace will fade and there will — leave not a rack behind . so in the theater , I start the play , it be a black sand rake , white cyc , and there be a little girl , miranda , on the horizon , build a drip castle , a sand castle . and as she be there on the edge of that stage , two stagehand all in black with watering can run along the top and start to pour water on the sand castle , and the sand castle start to drip and sink , but before it do , the audience see the black - clothe stagehand . the medium be apparent . it be banal . we see it . but as they start to pour the water , the light change from show you the black - clothe stagehand to focus , this rough magic that we do in theater , it focus right on the water itself . and all of a sudden , the audience 's perspective change . it become something magically large . it become the rainstorm . the mask actor , the puppeteer , they disappear , and the audience make that leap into this world , into this imaginary world of " the temp " actually happen . now the difference when I go and do it in the cinema , I start the actual movie with a close - up of a sand castle , a black sand castle , and what cinema can do be , by use camera , perspective , and also long shot and close - up , it start on a close - up of the sand castle , and as it pull away , you see that it be a miniature sit in the palm of the girl 's hand . and so I could play with the medium , and why I move from one medium to another be to be able to do this . now I be go to take you to " spider - man . " ( music ) ( video ) peter parker : ♪ stand on the precipice , I can soar away from this . ♪ jt : we be try to do everything in live theater that you can not do in two dimension in film and television . pp : ♪ rise above yourself and take control . ♪ george tsypin : we be look at new york from a spider - man point of view . spider man be not bind by gravity . manhattan in the show be not bind by gravity either . pp : ♪ be yourself and rise above it all . ♪ ensemble : ♪ sock ! pow ! ♪ ♪ slam ! scratch ! ♪ danny ezralow : I do not want you to even think there be a choreographer . it be real , what be happen . I prefer you to see people move , and you be go , " whoa , what be that ? " ( music ) jt : if I give enough movement in the sculpture , and the actor move their head , you feel like it be alive . it be really comic book live . it be a comic book come alive . ( music ) bono : they be mythology . they be modern myth , these comic book hero . pp : ♪ they believe . ♪ ( scream ) ( music ) ( applause ) jt : ohhhh . what be that ? circus , rock ' n ' roll , drama . what the hell be we do up there on that stage ? well , one last story , very quickly . after I be in that village , I cross the lake , and I see that the volcano be erupt on the other side , gunung batur , and there be a dead volcano next to the live volcano . I do not think I would be swallow by the volcano , and I be here . but it be very easy to climb up , be it not ? you hold on to the root , you put your foot in the little rock and climb up there , and you get to the top , and I be with a good friend who be an actor , and we say , " let us go up there . let us see if we can come close to the edge of that live volcano . " and we climb up and we get to the very top , and we be on the edge , on this precipice , roland disappear into the sulfur smoke at the volcano at the other end , and I be up there alone on this incredible precipice . do you hear the lyric ? I be on the precipice look down into a dead volcano to my left . to my right be sheer shale . it be come off . I be in thong and sarong . it be many year ago . and no hiking boot . and he be disappear , this mad french gypsy actor , off in the smoke , and I realize , I can not go back the way that I 've come . I can not . so I throw away my camera . I throw away my thong , and I look at the line straight in front of I , and I get down on all four like a cat , and I hold with my knee to either side of this line in front of I , for 30 yard or 30 foot , I do not know . the wind be massively blow , and the only way I could get to the other side be to look at the line straight in front of I . I know you 've all be there . I be in the crucible right now . it be my trial by fire . it be my company 's trial by fire . we survive because our theme song be " rise above . " boy fall from the sky , rise above . it be right there in the palm of both of our hand , of all of my company 's hand . I have beautiful collaborator , and we as creator only get there all together . I know you understand that . and you just stay go forward , and then you see this extraordinary thing in front of your eye . thank you . ( applause )  
   the day I leave home for the first time to go to university be a bright day brim with hope and optimism . I have do well at school . expectation for I be high , and I gleefully enter the student life of lecture , party and traffic cone theft . now appearance , of course , can be deceptive , and to an extent , this feisty , energetic persona of lecture - going and traffic cone stealing be a veneer , albeit a very well - craft and convince one . underneath , I be actually deeply unhappy , insecure and fundamentally frightened — frightened of other people , of the future , of failure and of the emptiness that I feel be within I . but I be skilled at hide it , and from the outside appear to be someone with everything to hope for and aspire to . this fantasy of invulnerability be so complete that I even deceive myself , and as the first semester end and the second begin , there be no way that anyone could have predict what be just about to happen . I be leave a seminar when it start , hum to myself , fumble with my bag just as I have do a hundred time before , when suddenly I hear a voice calmly observe , " she be leave the room . " I look around , and there be no one there , but the clarity and decisiveness of the comment be unmistakable . shake , I leave my book on the stair and hurry home , and there it be again . " she be open the door . " this be the beginning . the voice have arrive . and the voice persist , day and then week of it , on and on , narrate everything I do in the third person . " she be go to the library . " " she be go to a lecture . " it be neutral , impassive and even , after a while , strangely companionate and reassuring , although I do notice that its calm exterior sometimes slip and that it occasionally mirror my own unexpressed emotion . so , for example , if I be angry and have to hide it , which I often do , be very adept at conceal how I really feel , then the voice would sound frustrated . otherwise , it be neither sinister nor disturbing , although even at that point it be clear that it have something to communicate to I about my emotion , particularly emotion which be remote and inaccessible . now it be then that I make a fatal mistake , in that I tell a friend about the voice , and she be horrify . a subtle conditioning process have begin , the implication that normal people do not hear voice and the fact that I do mean that something be very seriously wrong . such fear and mistrust be infectious . suddenly the voice do not seem quite so benign anymore , and when she insist that I seek medical attention , I duly comply , and which prove to be mistake number two . I spend some time tell the college g.p . about what I perceive to be the real problem : anxiety , low self - worth , fear about the future , and be meet with bored indifference until I mention the voice , upon which he drop his pen , swung round and begin to question I with a show of real interest . and to be fair , I be desperate for interest and help , and I begin to tell he about my strange commentator . and I always wish , at this point , the voice have say , " she be dig her own grave . " I be refer to a psychiatrist , who likewise take a grim view of the voice 's presence , subsequently interpret everything I say through a lens of latent insanity . for example , I be part of a student tv station that broadcast news bulletin around the campus , and during an appointment which be run very late , I say , " I be sorry , doctor , I 've get to go . I be read the news at six . " now it be down on my medical record that eleanor have delusion that she be a television news broadcaster . it be at this point that event begin to rapidly overtake I . a hospital admission follow , the first of many , a diagnosis of schizophrenia come next , and then , bad of all , a toxic , torment sense of hopelessness , humiliation and despair about myself and my prospect . but having be encourage to see the voice not as an experience but as a symptom , my fear and resistance towards it intensify . now essentially , this represent take an aggressive stance towards my own mind , a kind of psychic civil war , and in turn this cause the number of voice to increase and grow progressively hostile and menacing . helplessly and hopelessly , I begin to retreat into this nightmarish inner world in which the voice be destine to become both my persecutor and my only perceive companion . they tell I , for example , that if I prove myself worthy of their help , then they could change my life back to how it have be , and a series of increasingly bizarre task be set , a kind of labor of hercule . it start off quite small , for example , pull out three strand of hair , but gradually it grow more extreme , culminate in command to harm myself , and a particularly dramatic instruction : " you see that tutor over there ? you see that glass of water ? well , you have to go over and pour it over he in front of the other student . " which I actually do , and which needless to say do not endear I to the faculty . in effect , a vicious cycle of fear , avoidance , mistrust and misunderstanding have be establish , and this be a battle in which I feel powerless and incapable of establish any kind of peace or reconciliation . two year later , and the deterioration be dramatic . by now , I have the whole frenzied repertoire : terrify voice , grotesque vision , bizarre , intractable delusion . my mental health status have be a catalyst for discrimination , verbal abuse , and physical and sexual assault , and I would be tell by my psychiatrist , " eleanor , you would be well off with cancer , because cancer be easy to cure than schizophrenia . " I have be diagnose , drug and discard , and be by now so torment by the voice that I attempt to drill a hole in my head in order to get they out . now look back on the wreckage and despair of those year , it seem to I now as if someone die in that place , and yet , someone else be save . a broken and haunted person begin that journey , but the person who emerge be a survivor and would ultimately grow into the person I be destine to be . many people have harm I in my life , and I remember they all , but the memory grow pale and faint in comparison with the people who 've help I . the fellow survivor , the fellow voice - hearer , the comrade and collaborator ; the mother who never give up on I , who know that one day I would come back to she and be willing to wait for I for as long as it take ; the doctor who only work with I for a brief time but who reinforce his belief that recovery be not only possible but inevitable , and during a devastating period of relapse tell my terrified family , " do not give up hope . I believe that eleanor can get through this . sometimes , you know , it snow as late as may , but summer always come eventually . " fourteen minute be not enough time to fully credit those good and generous people who fight with I and for I and who wait to welcome I back from that agonize , lonely place . but together , they forge a blend of courage , creativity , integrity , and an unshakeable belief that my shatter self could become heal and whole . I use to say that these people save I , but what I now know be they do something even more important in that they empower I to save myself , and crucially , they help I to understand something which I would always suspect : that my voice be a meaningful response to traumatic life event , particularly childhood event , and as such be not my enemy but a source of insight into solvable emotional problem . now , at first , this be very difficult to believe , not least because the voice appear so hostile and menacing , so in this respect , a vital first step be learn to separate out a metaphorical meaning from what I would previously interpret to be a literal truth . so for example , voice which threaten to attack my home I learn to interpret as my own sense of fear and insecurity in the world , rather than an actual , objective danger . now at first , I would have believe they . I remember , for example , sit up one night on guard outside my parent ' room to protect they from what I think be a genuine threat from the voice . because I would have such a bad problem with self - injury that most of the cutlery in the house have be hide , so I end up arm myself with a plastic fork , kind of like picnic ware , and sort of sit outside the room clutch it and wait to spring into action should anything happen . it be like , " do not mess with I . I 've get a plastic fork , do not you know ? " strategic . but a later response , and much more useful , would be to try and deconstruct the message behind the word , so when the voice warn I not to leave the house , then I would thank they for draw my attention to how unsafe I feel — because if I be aware of it , then I could do something positive about it — but go on to reassure both they and myself that we be safe and do not need to feel frightened anymore . I would set boundary for the voice , and try to interact with they in a way that be assertive yet respectful , establish a slow process of communication and collaboration in which we could learn to work together and support one another . throughout all of this , what I would ultimately realize be that each voice be closely relate to aspect of myself , and that each of they carry overwhelming emotion that I would never have an opportunity to process or resolve , memory of sexual trauma and abuse , of anger , shame , guilt , low self - worth . the voice take the place of this pain and give word to it , and possibly one of the great revelation be when I realize that the most hostile and aggressive voice actually represent the part of I that have be hurt most profoundly , and as such , it be these voice that need to be show the great compassion and care . it be arm with this knowledge that ultimately I would gather together my shattered self , each fragment represent by a different voice , gradually withdraw from all my medication , and return to psychiatry , only this time from the other side . ten year after the voice first come , I finally graduate , this time with the high degree in psychology the university have ever give , and one year later , the high master , which shall we say be not bad for a madwoman . in fact , one of the voice actually dictate the answer during the exam , which technically possibly count as cheat . ( laughter ) and to be honest , sometimes I quite enjoy their attention as well . as oscar wilde have say , the only thing bad than be talk about be not be talk about . it also make you very good at eavesdropping , because you can listen to two conversation simultaneously . so it be not all bad . I work in mental health service , I speak at conference , I publish book chapter and academic article , and I argue , and continue to do so , the relevance of the follow concept : that an important question in psychiatry should not be what be wrong with you but rather what be happen to you . and all the while , I listen to my voice , with whom I would finally learn to live with peace and respect and which in turn reflect a grow sense of compassion , acceptance and respect towards myself . and I remember the most moving and extraordinary moment when support another young woman who be terrorize by her voice , and become fully aware , for the very first time , that I no long feel that way myself but be finally able to help someone else who be . I be now very proud to be a part of intervoice , the organizational body of the international hearing voice movement , an initiative inspire by the work of professor marius romme and dr . sandra escher , which locate voice hearing as a survival strategy , a sane reaction to insane circumstance , not as an aberrant symptom of schizophrenia to be endure , but a complex , significant and meaningful experience to be explore . together , we envisage and enact a society that understand and respect voice hearing , support the need of individual who hear voice , and which value they as full citizen . this type of society be not only possible , it be already on its way . to paraphrase chavez , once social change begin , it can not be reverse . you can not humiliate the person who feel pride . you can not oppress the people who be not afraid anymore . for I , the achievement of the hearing voice movement be a reminder that empathy , fellowship , justice and respect be more than word ; they be conviction and belief , and that belief can change the world . in the last 20 year , the hearing voice movement have establish hearing voice network in 26 country across five continent , work together to promote dignity , solidarity and empowerment for individual in mental distress , to create a new language and practice of hope , which , at its very center , lie an unshakable belief in the power of the individual . as peter levine have say , the human animal be a unique being endow with an instinctual capacity to heal and the intellectual spirit to harness this innate capacity . in this respect , for member of society , there be no great honor or privilege than facilitate that process of healing for someone , to bear witness , to reach out a hand , to share the burden of someone 's suffering , and to hold the hope for their recovery . and likewise , for survivor of distress and adversity , that we remember we do not have to live our life forever define by the damaging thing that have happen to we . we be unique . we be irreplaceable . what lie within we can never be truly colonize , contort , or take away . the light never go out . as a very wonderful doctor once say to I , " do not tell I what other people have tell you about yourself . tell I about you . " thank you . ( applause )  
   so imagine , you be in the supermarket , you be buy some grocery , and you get give the option for a plastic or a paper shopping bag . which one do you choose if you want to do the right thing by the environment ?     most people do pick the paper . okay , let us think of why . it be brown to start with . therefore , it must be good for the environment . it be biodegradable . it be reusable . in some case , it be recyclable . so when people be look at the plastic bag , it be likely they be think of something like this , which we all know be absolutely terrible , and we should be avoid at all expense these kind of environmental damage . but people be often not think of something like this , which be the other end of the spectrum . when we produce material , we need to extract they from the environment , and we need a whole bunch of environmental impact .     you see , what happen be , when we need to make complex choice , we human like really simple solution , and so we often ask for simple solution . and I work in design . I advise designer and innovator around sustainability , and everyone always say to I , " oh leyla , I just want the eco - material . "     and I say , " well , that be very complex , and we 'll have to spend four hour talk about what exactly an eco - material mean , because everything at some point come from nature , and it be how you use the material that dictate the environmental impact . so what happen be , we have to rely on some sort of intuitive framework when we make decision . so I like to call that intuitive framework our environmental folklore . it be either the little voice at the back of your head , or it be that gut feel you get when you 've do the right thing , so when you 've pick the paper bag or when you 've buy a fuel - efficient car . and environmental folklore be a really important thing because we be try to do the right thing . but how do we know if we be actually reduce the net environmental impact that our action as individual and as professional and as a society be actually have on the natural environment ?     so the thing about environmental folklore be it tend to be base on our experience , the thing we 've hear from other people . it do not tend to be base on any scientific framework . and this be really hard , because we live in incredibly complex system . we have the human system of how we communicate and interrelate and have our whole constructed society , we have the industrial system , which be essentially the entire economy , and then all of that have to operate within the big system , and , I would argue , the most important , the ecosystem . and you see , the choice that we make as an individual , but the choice that we make in every single job that we have , no matter how high or low you be in the pecking order , have an impact on all of these system . and the thing be that we have to find way if we be actually go to address sustainability of interlock those complex system and make well choice that result in net environmental gain . what we need to do be we need to learn to do more with less . we have an increase population , and everybody like their mobile phone , especially in this situation here . so we need to find innovative way of solve some of these problem that we face .     and that be where this process call life cycle thinking come in . so essentially , everything that be create go through a series of life cycle stage , and we use this scientific process call life cycle assessment , or in america , you guy say life cycle analysis , in order to have a clear picture of how everything that we do in the technical part of those system affect the natural environment . so we go all the way back to the extraction of raw material , and then we look at manufacturing , we look at packaging and transportation , use , and end of life , and at every single one of these stage , the thing that we do have an interaction with the natural environment , and we can monitor how that interaction be actually affect the system and service that make life on earth possible . and through do this , we 've learn some absolutely fascinating thing . and we 've bust a bunch of myth .     so to start with , there be a word that be use a lot . it be use a lot in marketing , and it be use a lot , I think , in our conversation when we be talk about sustainability , and that be the word biodegradability . now biodegradability be a material property ; it be not a definition of environmental benefit . allow I to explain . when something natural , something that be make from a cellulose fiber like a piece of bread , even , or any food waste , or even a piece of paper , when something natural end up in the natural environment , it degrade normally . its little carbon molecule that it store up as it be grow be naturally release back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide , but this be a net situation . most natural thing do not actually end up in nature . most of the thing , the waste that   we produce , end up in landfill . landfill be a different environment . in landfill , those same carbon molecule degrade in a different way , because a landfill be anaerobic . it be get no oxygen . it be tightly compact and hot . those same molecule , they become methane , and methane be a 25 time more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide . so our old lettuce and product that we have throw out that be make out of biodegradable material , if they end up in landfill , contribute to climate change . you see , there be facility now that can actually capture that methane and generate power , displace the need for fossil fuel power , but we need to be smart about this . we need to identify how we can start to leverage these type of thing that be already happen and start to design system and service that alleviate these problem . because right now , what people do be they turn around and they say , " let us ban plastic bag . we 'll give people paper because that be well for the environment . " but if you be throw it in the bin , and your local landfill facility be just a normal one , then we be have what be call a double negative .     I be a product designer by trade . I then do social science . and so I be absolutely fascinated by consumer good and how the consumer good that we have kind of become immune to that fill our life have an impact on the natural environment . and these guy be , like , serial offender , and I be pretty sure everyone in this room have a refrigerator . now america have this amazing ability to keep grow refrigerator . in the last few year , they 've grow one cubic foot on average , the standard size of a refrigerator . and the problem be , they be so big now , it be easy for we to buy more food that we can not eat or find . I mean , I have thing at the back of my refrigerator that have be there for year , all right ? and so what happen be , we waste more food . and as I be just explain , food waste be a problem . in fact , here in the u.s . , 40 percent of food purchase for the home be waste . half of the world 's produce food be waste . that be the late u.n . stat . up to half of the food . it be insane . it be 1.3 billion ton of food per annum . and I blame it on the refrigerator , well , especially in western culture , because it make it easy . I mean , there be a lot of complex system go on here . I do not want to make it so simplistic .     but the refrigerator be a serious contributor to this , and one of the feature of it be the crisper drawer . you all get crisper drawer ? the drawer that you put your lettuce in ? lettuce have a habit of go soggy in the crisper drawer , do not they ? yeah ? soggy lettuce ? in the u.k . , this be such a problem that there be a government report a few year ago that actually say the second big offender of waste food in the u.k . be the soggy lettuce . it be call the soggy lettuce report . okay ? so this be a problem , people . these poor little lettuce be getting throw out left , right and center because the crisper drawer be not design to actually keep thing crisp . okay . you need a tight environment . you need , like , an airless environment to prevent the degrading that would happen naturally . but the crisper drawer , they be just a drawer with a slightly well seal . anyway , I be clearly obsess . do not ever invite I over because I 'll just start go through your refrigerator and look at all sort of thing like that . but essentially , this be a big problem . because when we lose something like the lettuce from the system , not only do we have that impact   I just explain at the end of life , but we actually have have to grow that lettuce . the life cycle impact of that lettuce be astronomical . we 've have to clear land . we 've have to plant seed , phosphorus , fertilizer , nutrient , water , sunlight . all of the embody impact in that lettuce get lose from the system , which make it a far big environmental impact than the loss of the energy from the fridge . so we need to design thing like this far well if we be go to start address serious environmental problem . we could start with the crisper drawer and the size . for those of you in the room who do design fridge , that would be great .     the problem be , imagine if we actually start to reconsider   how we design thing . so I look at the refrigerator as a sign of modernity , but we actually have not really change the design of they that much since the 1950 . a little bit , but essentially they be still big box , cold box that we store stuff in . so imagine if we actually really start to identify these problem and use that as the foundation for find innovative and elegant design solution that will solve those problem . this be design - lead system change , design dictate the way in which the system can be far more sustainable . forty percent food waste be a major problem . imagine if we design fridge that halve that .     another item that I find fascinating be the electric tea kettle , which I find out that you do not do tea kettle in this country , really , do you ? but that be really big in the u.k . ninety - seven percent of household in the united kingdom own an electric tea kettle . so they be very popular . and , I mean , if I be to work with a design firm or a designer , and they be design one of these , and they want to do it eco , they would usually ask I two thing . they would say , " leyla , how do I make it technically efficient ? " because obviously energy 's a problem with this product . or , " how do I make it green material ? how do I make the material green in the manufacturing ? " would you ask I those question ? they seem logical , right ? yeah . well I would say , " you be look at the wrong problem . " because the problem be with use . it be with how people use the product . sixty - five percent of brit admit to over - fill their kettle when they only need one cup of tea . all of this extra water that be be boil require energy , and it be be calculate that in one day of extra energy use from boiling kettle be enough to light all of the streetlight in england for a night .     but this be the thing . this be what I call a product - person failure . but we 've get a product - system failure go on with these little guy , and they be so ubiquitous , you   do not even notice they be there . and this guy over here , though , he do . he be name simon . simon work for the national electricity company in the u.k . he have a very important job of monitor all of the electricity come into the system to make sure there be enough so it power everybody 's home . he be also watch television . the reason be because there be a unique phenomenon that happen in the u.k . the moment that very popular tv show end . the minute the ad break come on , this man have to rush to buy nuclear power from france , because everybody turn their kettle on at the same time . ( laughter ) 1.5 million kettle , seriously problematic . so imagine if you design kettle , you actually find a way to solve these system failure , because this be a huge amount of pressure on the system , just because the product have not think about the problem that it be go to have when it exist in the world . now , I look at a number of kettle available on the market , and find the minimum fill line , so the little piece of information that tell you how much you need to put in there , be between two and a five - and - a - half cup of water just to make one cup of tea . so this kettle here be an example of one where it actually have two reservoir . one be a boiling chamber , and one be the water holder . the user actually have to push that button to get their hot water boil , which mean , because we be all lazy , you only fill exactly what you need . and this be what I call behavior - change product : product , system or service that intervene and solve these problem up front .     now , this be a technology arena , so obviously these thing be quite popular , but I think if we be go to keep design , buy and use and throw out these kind of product at the rate we currently do , which be astronomically high , there be seven billion people who live in the world right now . there be six billion mobile phone subscription as of last year . every single year , 1.5 billion mobile phone roll off production line , and some company report their production rate as be great than the human birth rate . one hundred fifty - two million phone   be throw out in the u.s . last year ; only 11 percent be recycle . I be from australia . we have a population of 22 million — do not laugh — and it be be report that 22 million phone be in people 's drawer . we need to find way of solve the problem around this , because these thing be so complicated . they have so much lock up inside they . gold ! do you know that it be actually cheap now to get gold out of a ton of old mobile phone than it be out of a ton of gold ore ? there be a number of highly complex and valuable material embody inside these thing , so we need to find way of encourage disassembly , because this be otherwise what happen . this be a community in ghana , and e - waste be report , or electronic waste be report by the u.n . as be up to 50 million ton traffic . this be how they get the gold and the other valuable material out . they burn the electronic waste in open space . these be community , and this be happen all over the world . and because we do not see the ramification of the choice that we make as designer , as businesspeople , as consumer , then these kind of externality happen , and these be people 's life . so we need to find smart , more system - base , innovative solution to these problem , if we be go to start to live sustainably within this world .     so imagine if , when you buy your mobile phone , your new one because you replace your old one — after 15 to 18 month be the average time that people replace their phone , by the way — so if we be go to keep this kind of expedient mobile phone replacing , then we should be look at close the loop on these system . the people who produce these phone , and some of which I be sure be in the room right now , could potentially look at do what we call closed - loop system , or product system service , so identify that there be a market demand and that market demand be not go to go anywhere , so you design the product to solve the problem . design for disassembly , design for light - weighting . we hear some of those kind of strategy be use in the tesla motors car today . these kind of approach be not hard , but understand the system and then look for viable , market - drive consumer demand alternative be how we can start radically alter the sustainability agenda , because I hate to break it to you all : consumption be the big problem . but design be one of the good solution .     these kind of product be everywhere . by identify alternative way of do thing , we can actually start to innovate , and I say actually start to innovate . I be sure everyone in this room be very innovative . but in the regard to use sustainability as a parameter , as a criterion for fuel system - base solution , because as I 've just demonstrate with these simple product , they be participate in these major problem . so we need to look across the entire life of the thing that we do .     if you just have paper or plastic — obviously reusable be far more beneficial — then the paper be bad , and the paper be bad because it weigh four to 10 time more than the plastic , and when we actually compare , from a life cycle perspective , a kilo of plastic and a kilo of paper , the paper be far well , but the functionality of a plastic or a paper bag to carry your grocery home be not   do with a kilo of each material . it be do with a very small amount of plastic and quite a lot more paper . because functionality define environmental impact , and I say early that the designer always ask I for the eco - material . I say , there be only a few material that you should completely avoid . the rest of they , it be all about application , and at the end of the day , everything we design and produce in the economy or buy as consumer be do so for function . we want something , therefore we buy it . so break thing back down and deliver smartly , elegantly , sophisticated solution that take into consideration the entire system and the entire life of the thing , everything , all the way back to the extraction through to the end of life , we can start to actually find really innovative solution .     and I 'll just leave you with one very quick thing that a designer say to I recently   who I work with , a senior designer . I say , " how come you be not do   sustainability ? I know you know this . " and he say , " well , recently I pitch a sustainability project to a client , and turn and he say to I , ' I know it be go to cost less , I know it be go to sell more , but we be not pioneer , because pioneer have arrow in their back . ' "     I think we 've get a roomful of pioneer , and I hope there be far more pioneer out there , because we need to solve these problem .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I have brain surgery 18 year ago , and since that time , brain science have become a personal passion of mine . I be actually an engineer . and first let I say , I recently join google 's moonshot group , where I have a division , the display division in google x , and the brain science work I be speak about today be work I do before I join google and on the side outside of google .     so that say , there be a stigma when you have brain surgery . be you still smart or not ? and if not , can you make yourself smart again ?     after my neurosurgery , part of my brain be miss , and I have to deal with that . it be not the grey matter , but it   be the gooey part dead center that make key hormone and neurotransmitter . immediately after my surgery , I have to decide what amount of each of over a dozen powerful chemical to take each day , because if I just take nothing , I would die within hour . every day now for 18 year — every single day — I 've have to try to decide the combination and mixture of chemical , and try to get they , to stay alive . there have be several close call .     but luckily , I be an experimentalist at heart , so I decide I would experiment to try to find more optimal dosage because there really be not a clear road map on this that be detailed . I begin to try different mixture , and I be blow away by how tiny change in dosage dramatically change my sense of self , my sense of who I be , my thinking , my behavior towards people . one particularly dramatic case : for a couple month I actually try dosage and chemical typical of a man in his early 20 , and I be blow away by how my thought change . ( laughter ) I be you all the time , I think about sex constantly , and I think I be the smart person in the entire world , and — ( laughter ) — of course over the year I would meet guy kind of like that , or maybe kind of tone - down version of that . I be kind of extreme . but to I , the surprise be , I be not try to be arrogant . I be actually try , with a little bit of insecurity , to actually fix a problem in front of I , and it just do not come out that way .     so I could not handle it . I change my dosage . but that experience , I think , give I a new appreciation for man and what they might walk through , and I 've get along with man a lot well since then .     what I be try to do with tune these hormone and neurotransmitter and so forth be to try to get my intelligence back after my illness and surgery , my creative thought , my idea flow . and I think mostly in image , and so for I that become a key metric — how to get these mental image that I use as a way of rapid prototyping , if you will , my idea , try on different new idea for size , play out scenario . this kind of thinking be not new . philiosopher like hume and descarte and hobbe see thing similarly . they think that mental image and idea be actually the same thing . there be those today that dispute that , and lot of debate about how the mind work , but for I it be simple : mental image , for most of we , be central in inventive and creative thinking .     so after several year , I tune myself up and I have lot of great , really vivid mental image with a lot of sophistication and the analytical backbone behind they . and so now I be work on , how can I get these mental image in my mind out to my computer screen fast ? can you imagine , if you will , a movie director be able to use her imagination alone to direct the world in front of she ? or a musician to get the music out of his head ? there be incredible possibility with this as a way for creative people to share at light speed . and the truth be , the remain bottleneck in be able to do this be just up the resolution of brain scan systems .     so let I show you why I think   we be pretty close to get there by share with you two recent experiment from two top neuroscience group . both use fmri technology — functional magnetic resonance imaging technology — to image the brain , and here be a brain scan set from giorgio ganis and his colleague at harvard . and the left - hand column show a brain scan of a person look at an image . the middle column show the brainscan of that same individual imagining , see that same image . and the right column be create by subtract the middle   column from the left column , show the difference to be nearly zero . this be repeat on lot of different individual with lot of different image , always with a similar result . the difference between see an image and imagine see that same image be next to nothing .     next let I share with you one other experiment , this from jack gallant 's lab at cal berkeley . they 've be able to decode brainwave into recognizable visual field . so let I set this up for you . in this experiment , individual be show hundred of hour of youtube video while scan be make of their brain to create a large library of their brain react to video sequence . then a new movie be show with new image , new people , new animal in it , and a new scan set be record . the computer , use brain scan datum alone , decode that new brain scan to show what it think the   individual be actually see . on the right - hand side , you see the computer 's guess , and on the left - hand side , the present clip . this be the jaw - dropper . we be so close to be able to do this . we just need to up the resolution . and now remember that when you see an image versus when you imagine that same image , it create the same brain scan .     so this be do with the high - resolution brain scan system available today , and their resolution have increase really about a thousandfold in the last several year . next we need to increase the resolution another thousandfold to get a deep glimpse . how do we do that ? there be a lot of technique in this approach . one way be to crack open your skull and put in electrode . I be not for that . there be a lot of new imaging technique be propose , some even by I , but give the recent success of mri , first we need to ask the question , be it the end of the road with this technology ? conventional wisdom say the only way to get high resolution be with big magnet , but at this point big magnet only offer incremental resolution improvement , not the thousandfold we need . I be put forward an idea : instead of big magnet , let us make well magnet . there be some new technology breakthrough in nanoscience when apply to magnetic structure that have create a whole new class of magnet , and with these magnet , we can lay down very fine detailed magnetic field pattern throughout the brain , and use those , we can actually create holographic - like interference structure to get precision control over many pattern , as be show here by shift thing . we can create much more complicated structure with slightly different arrangement , kind of like make spirograph .     so why do that matter ? a lot of effort in mri over the year have go into make really big , really huge magnet , right ? but yet most of the recent advance in resolution have actually come from ingeniously clever encoding and decode solution in the f.m . radio frequency transmitter and receiver in the mri system . let us also , instead of a uniform magnetic field , put down structured magnetic pattern in addition to the f.m . radio frequency . so by combine the magnetic pattern with the pattern in the f.m . radio frequency processing which can massively increase the information that we can extract in a single scan . and on top of that , we can then layer our ever - grow knowledge   of brain structure and memory to create a thousandfold increase that we need . and use fmri , we should be able to measure not just oxygenate blood flow , but the hormone and neurotransmitter   I 've talk about and maybe even the direct neural activity , which be the dream .     we be go to be able to dump our idea directly to digital medium . could you imagine if we could leapfrog language and communicate directly with human thought ? what would we be capable of then ? and how will we learn to deal with the truth of unfiltered human thought ? you think the internet be big . these be huge question . it might be irresistible as a tool to amplify our thinking and communication skill . and indeed , this very same tool may prove to lead to the cure for alzheimer 's and similar disease .     we have little option but to open this door . regardless , pick a year — will it happen in five year or 15 year ? it be hard to imagine it take much long . we need to learn how to take this step together .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I 've come here today to talk to you about a problem . it be a very simple yet devastating problem , one that span the globe and be affect all of we . the problem be anonymous company . it sound like a really dry and technical thing , do not it ? but anonymous company be make it difficult and sometimes impossible to find out the actual human being responsible sometimes for really terrible crime . so , why be I here talk to all of you ? well , I guess I be a lifelong troublemaker and when my parent teach my twin brother and I to question authority , I do not think they know where it might lead . ( laughter ) and , they probably really regret it during my stroppy teenage year when , predictably , I question their authority a lot . and a lot of my school teacher do not appreciate it much either . you see , since the age of about five I 've always ask the question , but why ? but why do the earth go around the sun ? but why be blood red ? but why do I have to go to school ? but why do I have to respect the teacher and authority ? and little do I realize that this question would become the basis of everything I would do . and so it be in my twenty , a long time ago , that one rainy sunday afternoon in north london I be sit with simon taylor and patrick alley and we be busy stuffing envelope for a mail out in the office of the campaign group where we work at the time . and as usual , we be talk   about the world 's problem . and in particular , we be talk about the civil war in cambodia . and we have talk about that   many , many time before . but then suddenly we stop and look at each other and say , but why do not we try and change this ? and from that slightly crazy question , over two decade and many campaign later , include alert the world to the problem of blood diamond fund war , from that crazy question , global witness be now an 80 - strong team of campaigner , investigator ,   journalist and lawyer . and we be all drive by the same belief , that change really be possible .     so , what exactly do global witness do ? we investigate , we report , to uncover the people really responsible for fund conflict — for steal million from citizen around the world , also know as state looting , and for destroy the environment . and then we campaign hard to   change the system itself . and we be do this because   so many of the country rich in natural resource like oil or diamond or timber be home to some of the poor and most dispossess people on the planet . and much of this injustice be make possible by currently accept business practice . and one of these be anonymous company . now we 've come up against anonymous company in lot of our investigation , like in the democratic republic of congo , where we expose how secretive deal involve anonymous company have deprive the citizen of one of the poor country on the planet of well over a billion dollar . that be twice the country 's health   and education budget combine . or in liberia , where an international predatory log company use front company as it attempt to grab a really huge chunk of liberia 's unique forest . or political corruption in sarawak , malaysia , which have lead to the destruction   of much of its forest . well , that use anonymous company too . we secretly film some of the family of the former chief minister and a lawyer as they tell our undercover investigator exactly how these dubious deal be do use such company . and the awful thing be , there be so many other example out there from all walk of life . this truly be a scandal of epic proportion hide in plain sight . whether it be the ruthless mexican drug cartel , the zetas , who use anonymous company   to launder profit while their drug - relate violence be tear community apart across the america . or the anonymous company , which buy up americans ' tax debt , pile on the legal fee and then give homeowner a choice : pay up or lose your home . imagine be threaten with lose your home sometimes over a debt of just a few hundred dollar , and not be able to find out who you be really up against .     now anonymous company be great for sanction bust too . as the iranian government find out when , through a series of front company , it own a building in the very heart of manhattan , on fifth avenue , despite american sanction . and juicy couture , home of of the velvet track suit , and other company be the unwitting , unknowe tenant there . there be just so many example , the horesemeat scandal in europe , the italian mafia , they 've use these company for decade . the $ 100 million american medicare fraud , the supply of weapon to war around the world include those in eastern europe in the early ' 90 . anonymous company have even come to light in the recent revolution in the ukraine .     but , for every case that we and other expose there be so many more that will remain hidden away because of the current system . and it be just a simple truth that some of the people responsible   for outrageous crime , for steal from you and I and million of other , they be remain faceless and they be escape accountability and they be do this with ease , and they be do it use legal structure . and really , that be unfair . well , you might well ask , what exactly be an anonymous company , and can I really set one up , and use it , without anyone know who I be ? well , the answer be , yes you can . but if you be anything like I , you 'll want to see some of that for yourself , so let I show you . well first you need to work out where you want to set it up . now , at this point you might be imagine one of those lovely tropical island tax haven but here be the thing , shockingly , my own hometown , london , and indeed the u.k . , be one of the good place in the world to set up an anonymous company . and the other , even well , I be afraid that be america . do you know , in some state across america you need less identification to open up a company than you do to get a library card , like delaware , which be one of the easy place in the world to set up an anonymous company .     okay , so let us say it be america , and let us say it be delaware , and now you can simply go online and find yourself a company service provider . these be the company that   can set your one up for you , and remember , it be all legal , routine business practice . so , here be one , but there be plenty of other to choose from . and having make your choice , you then pick what type of company you want and then fill in a contact , name and address . but do not worry , it do not have to be your name . it can be your lawyer 's or your service provider 's , and it be not for the public record anyway . and then you add the owner of the company . now this be the key part , and again it do not have to be you , because you can get creative , because there be a whole universe   out there of nominee to choose from . and nominee be the people that you can legally pay to be your company 's owner . and if you do not want to involve anyone else , it do not even have to be an actual human being . it could be another company . and then finally , give your company a name add a few more detail and make your payment . and then the service provider will take a few hour or more to process it . but there you be , in 10 minute of online shopping you can create yourself an anonymous company . and not only be it easy , really , really easy and cheap , it be totally legal too . but the fun do not have to end there , maybe you want to be even more anonymous . well , that be no problem either . you can simply keep add layer , company own by company . you can have hundred of layer with hundred of company spread across lot of different country , like a giant web , each layer add anonymity . each layer make it more difficult for law enforcement and other to find out who the real owner be . but whose interest be this all serve ? it might be in the interest of the company or a particular individual , but what about all of we , the public ? there have not even be a global conversation yet about whether it be okay to misuse company in this way . and what do it all mean for we ?     well , an example that really haunt I be one I come across recently . and it be that of a horrific fire in a nightclub in buenos air about a decade ago . it be the night before new year 's eve . three thousand very happy reveler , many of they teenager , be cram into a space mean for 1,000 . and then tragedy strike , a fire break out plastic decoration be melt from the ceiling and toxic smoke fill the club . so people try to escape only to find that some of the fire door have be chain shut . over 200 people die . seven hundred be injure try to get out . and as the victim ' family   and the city and the country reel in shock , investigator try to find out who be responsible . and as they look for the owner of the club , they find instead anonymous company , and confusion surround the identity of those involve with the company . now ultimately , a range of people be charge and some go to jail . but this be an awful tragedy , and it should not have be so difficult just to try and find out who be responsible for those death . because in an age when there be so much information out there in the open , why should this crucial information about company ownership stay hide away ? why should tax evader , corrupt   government official , arm trader and more , be able to hide their identity from we , the public ? why should this secrecy be such   an accept business practice ? anonymous company might be the norm right now but it be not always this way . company be create to give people a chance to innovate and not have to put everything on the line . company be create to limit financial risk , they be never intend to   be use as a moral shield . company be never intend to be anonymous , and they do not have to be .     and so I come to my wish . my wish be for we to know who own and control company so that they can no long be use anonymously against the public good . together let us ignite world opinion , change the law , and launch a new era of openness in business . so what might this look like ? well , imagine if you could go online and look up the real owner of a company . imagine if this datum be open and free , accessible across border for citizen and business and law enforcement alike . imagine what a game changer that would be . so how be we go to do this ? well , there be only one way . together , we have to change the law globally to create public registry which list the true owner of company and can be access you all with no loophole . and yes , this be ambitious , but there be momentum on this issue , and over the year I have see the sheer power of momentum , and it be just start on this issue . there be such an opportunity right now . and the ted community of creative and innovative thinker and doer across all of society could make the crucial difference . you really can make this change happen . now , a simple starting point be the address behind I for a facebook page that you can join now to support the campaign and spread the word . it be go to be a springboard for our global campaigning . and the techie among you , you could really help we create a prototype public registry to demonstrate what a powerful tool this could be . campaign group from around the world have come together to work on this issue . the u.k . government be already on board ; it support these public registry . and just last week , the european parliament come on board with a vote 600 to 30 in favor of public registry . that be momentum . ( applause ) but it be early day . america still need to come on board , as do so many other country . and to succeed we will all together need to help and push our politician , because without that , real far - reach , world - shift change just be not go to happen . because this be not just about change the law , this be about start a conversation about what it be okay for company to do , and in what way be it acceptable   to use company structure . this be not just a dry policy issue . this be a human issue which affect we all . this be about be on the right side of history . global citizen , innovator ,   business leader , individual , we need you . together , let us kickstart this global movement . let us just do it , let us end anonymous company . thank you . ( applause )  
   my job at twitter be to ensure user trust , protect user right and keep user safe , both from each other and , at time , from themselves . let us talk about what scale look like at twitter . back in january 2009 , we see more than two million new tweet each day on the platform . january 2014 , more than 500 million . we be see two million tweet in less than six minute . that be a 24,900 - percent increase .     now , the vast majority of activity on twitter put no one in harm 's way . there be no risk involve . my job be to root out and prevent activity that might . sound straightforward , right ? you might even think it would be easy , give that I just say the vast majority of activity on twitter put no one in harm 's way . why spend so much time search for potential calamity in innocuous activity ? give the scale that twitter be at , a one - in - a - million chance happen 500 time a day . it be the same for other company deal at this sort of scale . for we , edge case , those rare situation that be unlikely to occur , be more like norm . say 99.999 percent of tweet pose no risk to anyone . there be no threat involve . maybe people be document travel landmark like australia 's heart reef , or tweet about a concert they be attend , or share picture of cute baby animal . after you take out that 99.999 percent , that tiny percentage of tweet remain work out to roughly 150,000 per month . the sheer scale of what we be deal with make for a challenge .     you know what else make my role particularly challenging ? people do weird thing . ( laughter ) and I have to figure out what they be do , why , and whether or not there be risk involve , often without much in term of context or background . I be go to show you some example that I 've run into during my time at twitter — these be all real example — of situation that at first seem cut and dry , but the truth of the matter be something altogether different . the detail have be change to protect the innocent and sometimes the guilty . we 'll start off easy .     [ " yo bitch " ]     if you see a tweet that only say this , you might think to yourself , " that look like abuse . " after all , why would you want to receive the message , " yo , bitch . " now , I try to stay relatively hip to the late trend and meme , so I know that " yo , bitch " be also often a common greeting between friend , as well as be a popular " break bad " reference . I will admit that I do not expect to encounter a fourth use case . it turn out it be also use on twitter when people be role - playing as dog . ( laughter ) and in fact , in that case , it be not only not abusive , it be technically just an accurate greeting . ( laughter )     so okay , determine whether or not something be abusive without context , definitely hard .     let us look at spam . here be an example of an account engage in classic spammer behavior , send the exact same message to thousand of people . while this be a mockup I put together use my account , we see account do this all the time . seem pretty straightforward . we should just automatically suspend account engage in this kind of behavior . turn out there be some exception to that rule . turn out that that message could also be a notification you sign up for that the international space station be pass overhead because you want to go outside and see if you could see it . you be not go to get that chance if we mistakenly suspend the account think it be spam .     okay . let us make the stake high . back to my account , again exhibit classic behavior . this time it be send the same message and link . this be often indicative of   something call phishing , somebody try to steal another person 's account information by direct they to another website . that be pretty clearly not a good thing . we want to , and do , suspend account engage in that kind of behavior . so why be the stake high for this ? well , this could also be a bystander at a rally who manage to record a video of a police officer beat a non - violent protester who be try to let the world know what be happen . we do not want to gamble on potentially silence that crucial speech by classify it as spam and suspend it . that mean we evaluate hundred of parameter when look at account behavior , and even then , we can still get it wrong and have to reevaluate .     now , give the sort of challenge I be up against , it be crucial that I not only predict but also design protection for the unexpected . and that be not just an issue for I , or for twitter , it be an issue for you . it be an issue for anybody who be build or create something that you think be go to be amazing and will let people do awesome thing . so what do I do ? I pause and I think , how could all of this go horribly wrong ? I visualize catastrophe . and that be hard . there be a sort of inherent cognitive dissonance in do that , like when you be write your wedding vow at the same time as your prenuptial agreement . ( laughter ) but you still have to do it , particularly if you be marry   500 million tweet per day . what do I mean by " visualize catastrophe ? " I try to think of how something as benign and innocuous as a picture of a cat could lead to death , and what to do to prevent that . which happen to be my next example . this be my cat , eli . we want to give user the ability to add photo to their tweet . a picture be worth a thousand word . you only get 140 character . you add a photo to your tweet , look at how much more content you 've get now . there be all sort of great thing you can do by add a photo to a tweet . my job be not to think of those . it be to think of what could go wrong .     how could this picture lead to my death ? well , here be one possibility . there be more in that picture than just a cat . there be geodata . when you take a picture with your smartphone or digital camera , there be a lot of additional information save along in that image . in fact , this image also contain the equivalent of this , more specifically , this . sure , it be not likely that someone be go to try to track I down and do I harm base upon image datum associate with a picture I take of my cat , but I start by assume the bad will happen . that be why , when we launch photo on twitter , we make the decision to strip that geodata out . ( applause ) if I start by assume the bad and work backwards , I can make sure that the protection we build work for both expect and unexpected use case .     give that I spend my day and night imagine the bad that could happen , it would not be surprising if   my worldview be gloomy . ( laughter ) it be not . the vast majority of interaction I see — and I see a lot , believe I — be positive , people reach out to help or to connect or share information with each other . it be just that for those of we deal with scale , for those of we task with keep people safe , we have to assume the bad will happen , because for we , a one - in - a - million chance be pretty good odd .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   the world make you something that you be not , but you know inside what you be , and that question burn in your heart : how will you become that ? I may be somewhat unique in this , but I be not alone , not alone at all . so when I become a fashion model , I feel that I would finally achieve the dream that I would always want since I be a young child . my outside self finally match my inner truth , my inner self . for complicated reason which I 'll get to later , when I look at this picture , at that time I feel like , geena , you 've do it , you 've make it , you have arrive . but this past october , I realize that I be only just begin . all of we be put in box by our family , by our religion , by our society , our moment in history , even our own body . some people have the courage to break free , not to accept the limitation impose by the color of their skin or by the belief of those that surround they . those people be always the threat to the status quo , to what be consider acceptable .     in my case , for the last nine year , some of my neighbor , some of my friend , colleague , even my agent , do not know about my history . I think , in mystery , this be call the reveal . here be mine .     I be assign boy at birth base on the appearance of my genitalia . I remember when I be five year old in the philippines walk around our house , I would always wear this t - shirt on my head . and my mom ask I , " how come you always wear that t - shirt on your head ? " I say , " mom , this be my hair . I be a girl . " I know then how to self - identify .     gender have always be consider a fact , immutable , but we now know it be actually more fluid , complex and mysterious . because of my success , I never have the courage to share my story , not because I think what I be be wrong , but because of how the world treat those of we who wish to break free . every day , I be so grateful because I be a woman . I have a mom and dad and family who accept I for who I be . many be not so fortunate .     there be a long tradition in asian culture that celebrate the fluid mystery of gender . there be a buddhist goddess of compassion . there be a hindu goddess , hijra goddess . so when I be eight year old , I be at a fiesta in the philippines celebrate these mystery . I be in front of the stage , and I remember , out come this beautiful woman right in front of I , and I remember that moment something hit I : that be the kind of woman I would like to be . so when I be 15 year old , still dress as a boy , I meet this woman name t.l . she be a transgender beauty pageant manager . that night she ask I , " how come you be not join the beauty pageant ? " she convince I that if I join that she would take care of the registration fee and the garment , and that night , I win well in swimsuit and good in long gown and place second runner up among 40 - plus candidate . that moment change my life . all of a sudden , I be introduce to the world of beauty pageant . not a lot of people could say that your first job be a pageant queen for transgender woman , but I 'll take it .     so from 15 to 17 year old , I join the most prestigious pageant to the pageant where it be at the back of the truck , literally , or sometimes it would be a pavement next to a rice field , and when it rain — it rain a lot in the philippines — the organizer would have to move it inside someone 's house . I also experience the goodness of stranger , especially when we would travel in remote province in the philippines . but most importantly , I meet some of my good friend in that community .     in 2001 , my mom , who have move to san francisco , call I and tell I that my green card petition come through , that I could now move to the united states . I resist it . I tell my mom , " mom , I be have fun . I be here with my friend , I love travel , be a beauty pageant queen . " but then two week later she call I , she say , " do you know that if you move to the united states you could change your name and gender marker ? " that be all I need to hear . my mom also tell I to put two e be in the spelling of my name . she also come with I when I have my surgery in thailand at 19 year old . it be interesting , in some of the most rural city in thailand , they perform some of the most prestigious , safe and sophisticated surgery . at that time in the united states , you need to have surgery before you could change your name and gender marker . so in 2001 , I move to san francisco , and I remember look at my california driver 's license with the name geena and gender marker f. that be a powerful moment . for some people , their i.d . be their license to drive or even to get a drink , but for I , that be my license to live , to feel dignified . all of a sudden , my fear be minimize . I feel that I could conquer my dream and move to new york and be a model .     many be not so fortunate . I think of this woman name islan nettle . she be from new york , she be a young woman who be courageously live her truth , but hatred end her life . for most of my community , this be the reality in which we live . our suicide rate be nine time high than that of the general population . every november 20 , we have a global vigil for transgender day of remembrance . I be here at this stage because it be a long history of people who fight and stand up for injustice . this be marsha p. johnson and sylvia rivera . today , this very moment , be my real come out . I could no long live my truth for and by myself . I want to do my good to help other live their truth without shame and terror . I be here , expose , so that one day there will never be a need for a november 20 vigil .     my deep truth allow I to accept who I be . will you ?     thank you very much .     ( applause ) thank you . thank you . thank you . ( applause )     kathryn schulz : geena , one quick question for you . I be wonder what you would say , especially to parent , but in a more broad way , to friend , to family , to anyone who find themselves encounter a child or a person who be struggle with and uncomfortable with a gender that be be assign they , what might you say to the family member of that person to help they become good and caring and kind family member to they ?     geena rocero : sure . well , first , really , I be so blessed . the support system , with my mom especially , and my family , that in itself be just so powerful . I remember every time I would coach young trans woman , I would mentor they , and sometimes when they would call I and tell I that their parent can not accept it , I would pick up that phone call and tell my mom , " mom , can you call this woman ? " and sometimes it work , sometimes it do not , so — but it be just , gender identity be in the core of our being , right ? I mean , we be all assign gender at birth , so what I be try to do be to have this conversation that sometimes that gender assignment do not match , and there should be a space that would allow people to self - identify , and that be a conversation that we should have with parent , with colleague . the transgender movement , it be at the very beginning , to compare to how the gay movement start . there be still a lot of work that need to be do . there should be an understanding . there should be a space of curiosity and ask question , and I hope all of you guy will be my ally .     ks : thank you . that be so lovely . gr : thank you .     ( applause )  
   when people think about city , they tend to think of certain thing . they think of building and street and skyscraper , noisy cab . but when I think about city , I think about people . city be fundamentally about people , and where people go and where people meet be at the core of what make a city work . so even more important than building in a city be the public space in between they . and today , some of the most transformative change in city be happen in these public space .     so I believe that lively , enjoyable public space be the key to plan a great city . they be what make it come alive . but what make a public space work ? what attract people to successful public space , and what be it about unsuccessful place that keep people away ? I think , if I could answer those question , I could make a huge contribution to my city . but one of the more wonky thing about I be that I be an animal behaviorist , and I use those skill not to study animal behavior but to study how people in city use city public space .     one of the first space that I study be this little vest pocket park call paley park in midtown manhattan . this little space become a small phenomenon , and because it have such a profound impact on new yorker , it make an enormous impression on I . I study this park very early on in my career because it happen to have be build by my stepfather , so I know that place like paley park do not happen by accident . I see firsthand that they require incredible dedication and enormous attention to detail . but what be it about this space that make it special and draw people to it ? well , I would sit in the park and watch very carefully , and first among other thing be the comfortable , movable chair . people would come in , find their own seat , move it a bit , actually , and then stay a while , and then interestingly , people themselves attract other people , and ironically , I feel more peaceful if there be other people around . and it be green . this little park provide what new yorker crave : comfort and greenery . but my question be , why be not there more place with greenery and place to sit in the middle of the city where you do not feel alone , or like a trespasser ? unfortunately , that be not how city be be design .     so here you see a familiar sight . this be how plazas have be design for generation . they have that stylish , spartan look that we often associate with modern architecture , but it be not surprising that people avoid space like this . they not only look desolate , they feel downright dangerous . I mean , where would you sit here ? what would you do here ? but architect love they . they be plinth for their creation . they might tolerate a sculpture or two , but that be about it . and for developer , they be ideal . there be nothing to water , nothing to maintain , and no undesirable people to worry about . but do not you think this be a waste ? for I , become a city planner mean be able to truly change the city that I live in and love . I want to be able to create place that would give you the feeling that you get in paley park , and not allow developer to build bleak plazas like this . but over the many year , I have learn how hard it be to create successful , meaningful , enjoyable public space . as I learn from my stepfather , they certainly do not happen by accident , especially in a city like new york , where public space have to be fight for to begin with , and then for they to be successful , somebody have to think very hard about every detail .     now , open space in city be opportunity . yes , they be opportunity for commercial investment , but they be also opportunity for the common good of the city , and those two goal be often not align with one another , and therein lie the conflict .     the first opportunity I have to fight for a great public open space be in the early 1980s , when I be lead a team of planner at a gigantic landfill call battery park city in low manhattan on the hudson river . and this sandy wasteland have lain barren for 10 year , and we be tell , unless we find a developer in six month , it would go bankrupt . so we come up with a radical , almost insane idea . instead of build a park as a complement to future development , why do not we reverse that equation and build a small but very high - quality public open space first , and see if that make a difference . so we only could afford to build a two - block section of what would become a mile - long esplanade , so whatever we build have to be perfect . so just to make sure , I insist that we build a mock - up in wood , at scale , of the railing and the sea wall . and when I sit down on that test bench with sand still swirl all around I , the railing hit exactly at eye level , block my view and ruin my experience at the water 's edge .     so you see , detail really do make a difference . but design be not just how something look , it be how your body feel on that seat in that space , and I believe that successful design always depend on that very individual experience . in this photo , everything look very finished , but that granite edge , those light , the back on that bench , the tree in planting , and the many different kind of place to sit be all little battle that turn this project into a place that people want to be .     now , this prove very valuable 20 year later when michael bloomberg ask I to be his planning commissioner and put I in charge of shape the entire city of new york . and he say to I on that very day , he say that new york be project to grow from eight to nine million people . and he ask I , " so where be you go to put one million additional new yorker ? "     well , I do not have any idea . now , you know that new york do place a high value on attract immigrant , so we be excited about the prospect of growth , but honestly , where be we go to grow in a city that be already build out to its edge and surround by water ? how be we go to find housing for that many new new yorker ? and if we could not spread out , which be probably a good thing , where could new housing go ? and what about car ? our city could not possibly handle any more car .     so what be we go to do ? if we could not spread out , we have to go up . and if we have to go up , we have to go up in place where you would not need to own a car . so that mean use one of our great asset : our transit system . but we have never before thought of how we could make the most of it . so here be the answer to our puzzle . if we be to channel and redirect all new development around transit , we could actually handle that population increase , we think . and so here be the plan , what we really need to do : we need to redo our zoning — and zoning be the city planner 's regulatory tool — and basically reshape the entire city , target where new development could go and prohibit any development at all in our car - orient , suburban - style neighborhood . well , this be an unbelievably ambitious idea , ambitious because community have to approve those plan .     so how be I go to get this do ? by listen . so I begin listen , in fact , thousand of hour of listen just to establish trust . you know , community can tell whether or not you understand their neighborhood . it be not something you can just fake . and so I begin walk . I can not tell you how many block I walk , in swelter summer , in freeze winter , year after year , just so I could get to understand the dna of each neighborhood and know what each street feel like . I become an incredibly geeky zone expert , find way that zoning could address community ' concern . so little by little , neighborhood by neighborhood , block by block , we begin to set height limit so that all new development would be predictable and near transit . over the course of 12 year , we be able to rezone 124 neighborhood , 40 percent of the city , 12,500 block , so that now , 90 percent of all new development of new york be within a 10 - minute walk of a subway . in other word , nobody in those new building need to own a car .     well , those rezoning be exhausting and enervate and important , but rezoning be never my mission . you can not see zoning and you can not feel zoning . my mission be always to create great public space . so in the area where we zone for significant development , I be determined to create place that would make a difference in people 's life . here you see what be two mile of abandon , degrade waterfront in the neighborhood of greenpoint and williamsburg in brooklyn , impossible to get to and impossible to use . now the zoning here be massive , so I feel an obligation to create magnificent park on these waterfront , and I spend an incredible amount of time on every square inch of these plan . I want to make sure that there be tree - line path from the upland to the water , that there be tree and planting everywhere , and , of course , lot and lot of place to sit . honestly , I have no idea how it would turn out . I have to have faith . but I put everything that I have study and learn into those plan .     and then it open , and I have to tell you , it be incredible . people come from all over the city to be in these park . I know they change the life of the people who live there , but they also change new yorker ' whole image of their city . I often come down and watch people get on this little ferry that now run between the borough , and I can not tell you why , but I be completely move by the fact that people be use it as if it have always be there .     and here be a new park in low manhattan . now , the water 's edge in low manhattan be a complete mess before 9/11 . wall street be essentially landlocked because you could not get anywhere near this edge . and after 9/11 , the city have very little control . but I think if we go to the low manhattan development corporation and get money to reclaim this two mile of degraded waterfront that it would have an enormous effect on the rebuilding of low manhattan . and it do . low manhattan finally have a public waterfront on all three side .     I really love this park . you know , railing have to be high now , so we put bar seating at the edge , and you can get so close to the water you be practically on it . and see how the railing widen and flatten out so you can lay down your lunch or your laptop . and I love when people come there and look up and they say , " wow , there be brooklyn , and it be so close . "     so what be the trick ? how do you turn a park into a place that people want to be ? well , it be up to you , not as a city planner but as a human being . you do not tap into your design expertise . you tap into your humanity . I mean , would you want to go there ? would you want to stay there ? can you see into it and out of it ? be there other people there ? do it seem green and friendly ? can you find your very own seat ?     well now , all over new york city , there be place where you can find your very own seat . where there use to be parking space , there be now pop - up cafe . where broadway traffic use to run , there be now table and chair . where 12 year ago , sidewalk cafe be not allow , they be now everywhere . but claim these space for public use be not simple , and it be even hard to keep they that way .     so now I be go to tell you a story about a very unusual park call the high line . the high line be an elevated railway . ( applause ) the high line be an elevated railway that run through three neighborhood on manhattan 's west side , and when the train stop run , it become a self - seed landscape , a kind of a garden in the sky . and when I see it the first time , honestly , when I go up on that old viaduct , I fall in love the way you fall in love with a person , honestly . and when I be appoint , save the first two section of the high line from demolition become my first priority and my most important project . I know if there be a day that I do not worry about the high line , it would come down . and the high line , even though it be widely know now and phenomenally popular , it be the most contest public space in the city . you might see a beautiful park , but not everyone do . you know , it be true , commercial interest will always battle against public space . you might say , " how wonderful it be that more than four million people come from all over the world to visit the high line . " well , a developer see just one thing : customer . hey , why not take out those planting and have shop all along the high line ? would not that be terrific and will not it mean a lot more money for the city ? well no , it would not be terrific . it would be a mall , and not a park . ( applause ) and you know what , it might mean more money for the city , but a city have to take the long view , the view for the common good . most recently , the last section of the high line , the third section of the high line , the final section of the high line , have be pit against development interest , where some of the city 's lead developer be build more than 17 million square foot at the hudson yard . and they come to I and propose that they " temporarily disassemble " that third and final section . perhaps the high line do not fit in with their image of a gleam city of skyscraper on a hill . perhaps it be just in their way . but in any case , it take nine month of nonstop daily negotiation to finally get the sign agreement to prohibit its demolition , and that be only two year ago .     so you see , no matter how popular and successful a public space may be , it can never be take for grant . public space always — this be it save — public space always need vigilant champion , not only to claim they at the outset for public use , but to design they for the people that use they , then to maintain they to ensure that they be for everyone , that they be not violate , invade , abandon or ignore . if there be any one lesson that I have learn in my life as a city planner , it be that public space have power . it be not just the number of people use they , it be the even great number of people who feel well about their city just know that they be there . public space can change how you live in a city , how you feel about a city , whether you choose one city over another , and public space be one of the most important reason why you stay in a city .     I believe that a successful city be like a fabulous party . people stay because they be have a great time .     thank you .     ( applause ) thank you . ( applause )  
   when I be bear , there be really only one book about how to raise your child , and it be write by dr . spock . ( laughter ) thank you for indulge I . I have always want to do that .     no , it be benjamin spock , and his book be call " the common sense book of baby and child care . " it sell almost 50 million copy   by the time he die . today , I , as the mother of a six - year - old , walk into barne and noble , and see this . and it be amazing the variety that one find   on those shelf . there be guide to raise   an eco - friendly kid , a gluten - free kid , a disease - proof kid , which , if you ask I , be a little bit creepy . there be guide to raise a bilingual kid even if you only speak one language at home . there be guide to raise a financially savvy kid and a science - minded kid and a kid who be a whiz at yoga . short of teach your toddler how to defuse a nuclear bomb , there be pretty much a guide to everything .     all of these book be well - intentione . I be sure that many of they be great . but take together , I be sorry , I do not see help when I look at that shelf . I see anxiety . I see a giant candy - color monument to our collective panic , and it make I want to know , why be it that raise our child be associate with so much anguish and so much confusion ? why be it that we be at six and seven about the one thing human being have be do successfully for millennia , long before parent message board and peer - review study come along ? why be it that so many mother and father experience parenthood as a kind of crisis ?     crisis might seem like a strong word , but there be datum suggest it probably be not . there be , in fact , a paper of just this very name , " parenthood as crisis , " publish in 1957 , and in the 50 - plus year since , there have be plenty of scholarship document a pretty clear pattern of parental anguish . parent experience more stress than non - parent . their marital satisfaction be low . there have be a number of study look at how parent feel when they be spend time with their kid , and the answer often be , not so great . last year , I speak with a researcher name matthew killingsworth who be do a very , very imaginative project that track people 's happiness , and here be what he tell I he find : " interact with your friend be well than interact with your spouse , which be well than interact with other relative , which be well than interact with acquaintance , which be well than interact with parent , which be well than interact with child . who be on par with stranger . " ( laughter )     but here be the thing . I have be look at what underlie these datum for three year , and child be not the problem . something about parent right now at this moment be the problem . specifically , I do not think we know what parenting be suppose to be . parent , as a verb , only enter common usage in 1970 . our role as mother and father have change . the role of our child have change . we be all now furiously improvise our way through a situation for which there be no script , and if you be an amazing jazz musician , then improv be great , but for the rest of we , it can kind of feel like a crisis .     so how do we get here ? how be it that we be all now navigate a child - rear universe without any norm to guide we ? well , for starter , there have be a major historical change . until fairly recently , kid work , on our farm primarily , but also in factory , mill , mine . kid be consider economic asset . sometime during the progressive era , we put an end to this arrangement . we recognize kid have right , we ban child labor , we focus on education instead , and school become a child 's new work . and thank god it do . but that only make a parent 's role more confusing in a way . the old arrangement might not have be particularly ethical , but it be reciprocal . we provide food , clothing , shelter , and moral instruction to our kid , and they in return provide income .     once kid stop work , the economic of parenting change . kid become , in the word of one brilliant if totally ruthless sociologist , " economically worthless but emotionally priceless . " rather than they work for we , we begin to work for they , because within only a matter of decade it become clear : if we want our kid to succeed , school be not enough . today , extracurricular activity be a kid 's new work , but that be work for we too , because we be the one drive they to soccer practice . massive pile of homework be a kid 's new work , but that be also work for we , because we have to check it . about three year ago , a texas woman tell something to I that totally break my heart . she say , almost casually , " homework be the new dinner . " the middle class now pour all of its time and energy and resource into its kid , even though the middle class have less and less of those thing to give . mother now spend more time with their child than they do in 1965 , when most woman be not even in the workforce .     it would probably be easy for parent to do their new role if they know what they be prepare their kid for . this be yet another thing that make modern parenting so very confound . we have no clue what portion our wisdom , if any , be of use to our kid . the world be change so rapidly , it be impossible to say . this be true even when I be young . when I be a kid , high school specifically , I be tell that I would be at sea in the new global economy if I do not know japanese . and with all due respect to the japanese , it do not turn out that way . now there be a certain kind of middle - class parent that be obsess with teach their kid mandarin , and maybe they be onto something , but we can not know for sure . so , absent be able to anticipate the future , what we all do , as good parent , be try and prepare our kid for every possible kind of future , hope that just one of our effort will pay off . we teach our kid chess , think maybe they will need analytical skill . we sign they up for team sport , think maybe they will need collaborative skill , you know , for when they go to harvard business school . we try and teach they to be financially savvy and science - minded and eco - friendly and gluten - free , though now be probably a good time to tell you that I be not eco - friendly and gluten - free as a child . I eat jar of pureed macaroni and beef . and you know what ? I be do okay . I pay my taxis . I hold down a steady job . I be even invite to speak at ted . but the presumption now be that what be good enough for I , or for my folk for that matter , be not good enough anymore . so we all make a mad dash to that bookshelf , because we feel like if we be not try everything , it be as if we be do nothing and we be default on our obligation to our kid .     so it be hard enough to navigate our new role as mother and father . now add to this problem something else : we be also navigate new role as husband and wife because most woman today be in the workforce . this be another reason , I think , that parenthood feel like a crisis . we have no rule , no script , no norm for what to do when a child come along now that both mom and dad be breadwinner . the writer michael lewis once put this very , very well . he say that the sure way for a couple to start fight be for they to go out to dinner with another couple whose division of labor be ever so slightly different from theirs , because the conversation in the car on the way home go something like this : " so , do you catch that dave be the one who walk they to school every morning ? " ( laughter ) without script tell we who do what in this brave new world , couple fight , and both mother and father each have their legitimate gripe . mother be much more likely to be multi - tasking when they be at home , and father , when they be at home , be much more likely to be mono - tasking . find a guy at home , and odd be he be do just one thing at a time . in fact , ucla recently do a study look at the most common configuration of family member in middle - class home . guess what it be ? dad in a room by himself . accord to the american time use survey , mother still do twice as much childcare as father , which be well than it be in erma bombeck 's day , but I still think that something she write be highly relevant : " I have not be alone in the bathroom since october . " ( laughter )     but here be the thing : man be do plenty . they spend more time with their kid than their father ever spend with they . they work more pay hour , on average , than their wife , and they genuinely want to be good , involved dad . today , it be father , not mother , who report the most work - life conflict .     either way , by the way , if you think it be hard for traditional family to sort out these new role , just imagine what it be like now for non - traditional family : family with two dad , family with two mom , single - parent household . they be truly improvise as they go .     now , in a more progressive country , and forgive I here for capitulate to cliché and invoke , yes , sweden , parent could rely on the state for support . there be country that acknowledge the anxiety and the change role of mother and father . unfortunately , the united states be not one of they , so in case you be wonder what the u.s . have in common with papua new guinea and liberia , it be this : we too have no pay maternity leave policy . we be one of eight know country that do not .     in this age of intense confusion , there be just one goal upon which all parent can agree , and that be whether they be tiger mom or hippie mom , helicopter or drone , our kid ' happiness be paramount . that be what it mean to raise kid in an age when they be economically worthless but emotionally priceless . we be all the custodian of their self - esteem . the one mantra no parent ever question be , " all I want be for my child to be happy . " and do not get I wrong : I think happiness be a wonderful goal for a child . but it be a very elusive one . happiness and self - confidence , teach child that be not like teach they how to plow a field . it be not like teach they how to ride a bike . there be no curriculum for it . happiness and self - confidence can be the byproduct of other thing , but they can not really be goal unto themselves . a child 's happiness be a very unfair burden to place on a parent . and happiness be an even more unfair burden to place on a kid .     and I have to tell you , I think it lead to some very strange excess . we be now so anxious to protect our kid from the world 's ugliness that we now shield they from " sesame street . " I wish I could say I be kid about this , but if you go out and you buy the first few episode of " sesame street " on dvd , as I do out of nostalgia , you will find a warning at the beginning say that the content be not suitable for child . ( laughter ) can I just repeat that ? the content of the original " sesame street " be not suitable for child . when ask about this by the new york times , a producer for the show give a variety of explanation . one be that cookie monster smoke a pipe in one skit and then swallow it . bad modeling . I do not know . but the thing that stick with I be she say that she do not know whether oscar the grouch could be invent today because he be too depressive . I can not tell you how much this distress I . ( laughter ) you be look at a woman who have a periodic table of the muppet hang from her cubicle wall . the offend muppet , right there .     that be my son the day he be bear . I be high as a kite on morphine . I have have an unexpected c - section . but even in my opiate haze , I manage to have one very clear thought the first time I hold he . I whisper it into his ear . I say , " I will try so hard not to hurt you . " it be the hippocratic oath , and I do not even know I be say it . but it occur to I now that the hippocratic oath be a much more realistic aim than happiness . in fact , as any parent will tell you , it be awfully hard . all of we have say or do hurtful thing that we wish to god we could take back . I think in another era we do not expect quite so much from ourselves , and it be important that we all remember that the next time we be stare with our heart race at those bookshelf . I be not really sure how to create new norm for this world , but I do think that in our desperate quest to create happy kid , we may be assume the wrong moral burden . it strike I as a well goal , and , dare I say , a more virtuous one , to focus on make productive kid and moral kid , and to simply hope that happiness will come to they by virtue of the good that they do and their accomplishment and the love that they feel from we . that , anyway , be one response to have no script . absent have new script , we just follow the old one in the book — decency , a work ethic , love — and let happiness and self - esteem take care of themselves . I think if we all do that , the kid would still be all right , and so would their parent , possibly in both case even well .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I feel so fortunate that my first job be work at the museum of modern art on a retrospective of painter elizabeth murray . I learn so much from she . after the curator robert storr select all the painting from her lifetime body of work , I love look at the painting from the 1970 . there be some motif and element that would come up again later in her life . I remember ask she what she think of those early work . if you do not know they be her , you might not have be able to guess . she tell I that a few do not quite meet her own mark for what she want they to be . one of the work , in fact , so do not meet her mark , she have set it out in the trash in her studio , and her neighbor have take it because she see its value .     in that moment , my view of success and creativity change . I realize that success be a moment , but what we be always celebrate be creativity and mastery . but this be the thing : what get we to convert success into mastery ? this be a question I 've long ask myself . I think it come when we start to value the gift of a near win .     I start to understand this when I go on one cold may day to watch a set of varsity archer , all woman as fate would have it , at the northern tip of manhattan at columbia 's baker athletics complex . I want to see what be call archer 's paradox , the idea that in order to actually hit your target , you have to aim at something slightly skew from it . I stand and watch as the coach drive up these woman in this gray van , and they exit with this kind of relaxed focus . one hold a half - eat ice cream cone in one hand and arrow in the left with yellow fletching . and they pass I and smile , but they size I up as they make their way to the turf , and speak to each other not with word but with number , degree , I think , position for how they might plan to hit their target . I stand behind one archer as her coach stand in between we to maybe assess who might need support , and watch she , and I do not understand how even one be go to hit the ten ring . the ten ring from the standard 75 - yard distance , it look as small as a matchstick tip hold out at arm 's length . and this be while hold 50 pound of draw weight on each shot . she first hit a seven , I remember , and then a nine , and then two ten , and then the next arrow do not even hit the target . and I see that give she more tenacity , and she go after it again and again . for three hour this go on . at the end of the practice , one of the archer be so tax that she lie out on the ground just star - fish , her head look up at the sky , try to find what t.s . eliot might call that still point of the turn world .     it be so rare in american culture , there be so little that be vocational about it anymore , to look at what doggedness look like with this level of exactitude , what it mean to align your body posture for three hour in order to hit a target , pursue a kind of excellence in obscurity . but I stay because I realize I be witness what be so rare to glimpse , that difference between success and mastery .     so success be hit that ten ring , but mastery be know that it mean nothing if you can not do it again and again . mastery be not just the same as excellence , though . it be not the same as success , which I see as an event , a moment in time , and a label that the world confer upon you . mastery be not a commitment to a goal but to a constant pursuit . what get we to do this , what get we to forward thrust more be to value the near win . how many time have we designate something a classic , a masterpiece even , while its creator consider it hopelessly unfinished , riddle with difficulty and flaw , in other word , a near win ? elizabeth murray surprise I with her admission about her early painting . painter paul cézanne so often think his work be incomplete that he would deliberately leave they aside with the intention of pick they back up again , but at the end of his life , the result be that he have only sign 10 percent of his painting . his favorite novel be " the [ unknown ] masterpiece " by honoré de balzac , and he feel the protagonist be the painter himself . franz kafka see incompletion when other would find only work to praise , so much so that he want all of his diary , manuscript , letter and even sketch burn upon his death . his friend refuse to honor the request , and because of that , we now have all the work we now do by kafka : " america , " " the trial " and " the castle , " a work so incomplete it even stop mid - sentence .     the pursuit of mastery , in other word , be an ever - onward almost . " lord , grant that I desire more than I can accomplish , " michelangelo implore , as if to that old testament god on the sistine chapel , and he himself be that adam with his finger outstretche and not quite touching that god 's hand .     mastery be in the reach , not the arriving . it be in constantly want to close that gap between where you be and where you want to be . mastery be about sacrifice for your craft and not for the sake of craft your career . how many inventor and untold entrepreneur live out this phenomenon ? we see it even in the life of the indomitable arctic explorer ben saunder , who tell I that his triumph be not merely the result of a grand achievement , but of the propulsion of a lineage of near win .     we thrive when we stay at our own leading edge . it be a wisdom understand by duke ellington , who say that his favorite song out of his repertoire be always the next one , always the one he have yet to compose . part of the reason that the near win be inbuilt to mastery be because the great our proficiency , the more clearly we might see that we do not know all that we think we do . it be call the dun – kruger effect . the paris review get it out of james baldwin when they ask he , " what do you think increase with knowledge ? " and he say , " you learn how little you know . "     success motivate we , but a near win can propel we in an ongoing quest . one of the most vivid example of this come when we look at the difference between olympic silver medalist and bronze medalist after a competition . thomas gilovich and his team from cornell study this difference and find that the frustration silver medalist feel compare to bronze , who be typically a bit more happy to have just not receive fourth place and not medale at all , give silver medalist a focus on follow - up competition . we see it even in the gambling industry that once pick up on this phenomenon of the near win and create these scratch - off ticket that have a high than average rate of near win and so compel people to buy more ticket that they be call heart - stopper , and be set on a gambling industry set of abuse in britain in the 1970 . the reason the near win have a propulsion be because it change our view of the landscape and put our goal , which we tend to put at a distance , into more proximate vicinity to where we stand . if I ask you to envision what a great day look like next week , you might describe it in more general term . but if I ask you to describe a great day at ted tomorrow , you might describe it with granular , practical clarity . and this be what a near win do . it get we to focus on what , right now , we plan to do to address that mountain in our sight . it be jackie joyner - kersee , who in 1984 miss take the gold in the heptathlon by one third of a second , and her husband predict that would give she the tenacity she need in follow - up competition . in 1988 , she win the gold in the heptathlon and set a record of 7,291 point , a score that no athlete have come very close to since .     we thrive not when we 've do it all , but when we still have more to do . I stand here think and wonder about all the different way that we might even manufacture a near win in this room , how your life might play this out , because I think on some gut level we do know this . we know that we thrive when we stay at our own leading edge , and it be why the deliberate incomplete be inbuilt into creation myth . in navajo culture , some craftsman and woman would deliberately put an imperfection in textile and ceramic . it be what be call a spirit line , a deliberate flaw in the pattern to give the weaver or maker a way out , but also a reason to continue make work . master be not expert because they take a subject to its conceptual end . they be master because they realize that there be not one .     now it occur to I , as I think about this , why the archery coach tell I at the end of that practice , out of earshot of his archer , that he and his colleague never feel they can do enough for their team , never feel there be enough visualization technique and posture drill to help they overcome those constant near win . it do not sound like a complaint , exactly , but just a way to let I know , a kind of tender admission , to remind I that he know he be give himself over to a voracious , unfinished path that always require more .     we build out of the unfinished idea , even if that idea be our former self . this be the dynamic of mastery . come close to what you think you want can help you attain more than you ever dream you could . it be what I have to imagine elizabeth murray be think when I see she smile at those early painting one day in the gallery . even if we create utopias , I believe we would still have the incomplete . completion be a goal , but we hope it be never the end .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   so , a few year ago I be at jfk airport about to get on a flight , when I be approach by two woman who I do not think would be insult to hear themselves describe as tiny old tough - talk italian - american broad .     the tall one , who be like up here , she come march up to I , and she go , " honey , I got to ask you something . you get something to do with that whole ' eat , pray , love ' thing that be be go on lately ? "     and I say , " yes , I do . "     and she smack her friend and she go , " see , I tell you , I say , that be that girl . that be that girl who write that book base on that movie . " ( laughter )     so that be who I be . and believe I , I be extremely grateful to be that person , because that whole " eat , pray , love " thing be a huge break for I . but it also leave I in a really tricky position move forward as an author try to figure out how in the world I be ever go to write a book again that would ever please anybody , because I know well in advance that all of those people who have adore " eat , pray , love " be go to be incredibly disappointed in whatever I write next because it be not go to be " eat , pray , love , " and all of those people who have hate " eat , pray , love " be go to be incredibly disappointed in whatever I write next because it would provide evidence that I still live . so I know that I have no way to win , and know that I have no way to win make I seriously consider for a while just quit the game and move to the country to raise corgis . but if I have do that , if I have give up writing , I would have lose my beloved vocation , so I know that the task be that I have to find some way to gin up the inspiration to write the next book regardless of its inevitable negative outcome . in other word , I have to find a way to make sure that my creativity survive its own success . and I do , in the end , find that inspiration , but I find it in the most unlikely and unexpected place . I find it in lesson that I have learn early in life about how creativity can survive its own failure .     so just to back up and explain , the only thing I have ever want to be for my whole life be a writer . I write all through childhood , all through adolescence , by the time I be a teenager I be send my very bad story to the new yorker , hope to be discover . after college , I get a job as a din waitress , keep work , keep writing , keep try really hard to get publish , and fail at it . I fail at getting publish for almost six year . so for almost six year , every single day , I have nothing but rejection letter wait for I in my mailbox . and it be devastating every single time , and every single time , I have to ask myself if I should just quit while I be behind and give up and spare myself this pain . but then I would find my resolve , and always in the same way , by say , " I be not go to quit , I be go home . "     and you have to understand that for I , go home do not mean return to my family 's farm . for I , go home mean return to the work of writing because writing be my home , because I love write more than I hated fail at writing , which be to say that I love write more than I love my own ego , which be ultimately to say that I love write more than I love myself . and that be how I push through it .     but the weird thing be that 20 year later , during the crazy ride of " eat , pray , love , " I find myself you all over again with that unpublished young diner waitress who I use to be , think about she constantly , and feel like I be she again , which make no rational sense whatsoever because our life could not have be more different . she have fail constantly . I have succeed beyond my wildest expectation . we have nothing in common . why do I suddenly feel like I be she all over again ?     and it be only when I be try to unthread that that I finally begin to comprehend the strange and unlikely psychological connection in our life between the way we experience great failure and the way we experience great success . so think of it like this : for most of your life , you live out your existence here in the middle of the chain of human experience where everything be normal and reassuring and regular , but failure catapult you abruptly way out over here into the blind darkness of disappointment . success catapult you just as abruptly but just as far way out over here into the equally blind glare of fame and recognition and praise . and one of these fate be objectively see by the world as bad , and the other one be objectively see by the world as good , but your subconscious be completely incapable of discern the difference between bad and good . the only thing that it be capable of feeling be the absolute value of this emotional equation , the exact distance that you have be fling from yourself . and there be a real equal danger in both case of getting lose out there in the hinterland of the psyche .     but in both case , it turn out that there be also the same remedy for self - restoration , and that be that you have get to find your way back home again as swiftly and smoothly as you can , and if you be wonder what your home be , here be a hint : your home be whatever in this world you love more than you love yourself . so that might be creativity , it might be family , it might be invention , adventure , faith , service , it might be raise corgis , I do not know , your home be that thing to which you can dedicate your energy with such singular devotion that the ultimate result become inconsequential .     for I , that home have always be write . so after the weird , disorient success that I go through with " eat , pray , love , " I realize that all I have to do be exactly the same thing that I use to have to do all the time when I be an equally disorient failure . I have to get my ass back to work , and that be what I do , and that be how , in 2010 , I be able to publish the dread follow - up to " eat , pray , love . " and you know what happen with that book ? it bomb , and I be fine . actually , I kind of feel bulletproof , because I know that I have break the spell and I have find my way back home to write for the sheer devotion of it . and I stay in my home of writing after that , and I write another book that just come out last year and that one be really beautifully receive , which be very nice , but not my point . my point be that I be write another one now , and I 'll write another book after that and another and another and another and many of they will fail , and some of they might succeed , but I will always be safe from the random hurricane of outcome as long as I never forget where I rightfully live .     look , I do not know where you rightfully live , but I know that there be something in this world that you love more than you love yourself . something worthy , by the way , so addiction and infatuation do not count , because we all know that those be not safe place to live . right ? the only trick be that you 've get to identify the good , worthiest thing that you love most , and then build your house right on top of it and do not budge from it . and if you should someday , somehow get vault out of your home by either great failure or great success , then your job be to fight your way back to that home the only way that it have ever be do , by put your head down and perform with diligence and devotion and respect and reverence whatever the task be that love be call forth from you next . you just do that , and keep do that again and again and again , and I can absolutely promise you , from long personal experience in every direction , I can assure you that it be all go to be okay . thank you . ( applause )  
   " why ? " " why ? " be a question that parent ask I all the time . " why do my child develop autism ? " as a pediatrician , as a geneticist , as a researcher , we try and address that question .     but autism be not a single condition . it be actually a spectrum of disorder , a spectrum that range , for instance , from justin , a 13 - year - old boy who be not verbal , who can not speak , who communicate by use an ipad to touch picture to communicate his thought and his concern , a little boy who , when he get upset , will start rock , and eventually , when he be disturb enough , will bang his head to the point that he can actually cut it open and require stitch . that same diagnosis of autism , though , also apply to gabriel , another 13 - year - old boy who have quite a different set of challenge . he be actually quite remarkably gift in mathematic . he can multiple three number by three number in his head with ease , yet when it come to try to have a conversation , he have great difficulty . he do not make eye contact . he have difficulty start a conversation , feel awkward , and when he get nervous , he actually shut down . yet both of these boy have the same diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder .     one of the thing that concern we be whether or not there really be an epidemic of autism . these day , one in 88 child will be diagnose with autism , and the question be , why do this graph look this way ? have that number be increase dramatically over time ? or be it because we have now start label individual with autism , simply give they a diagnosis when they be still present there before yet simply do not have that label ? and in fact , in the late 1980 , the early 1990 , legislation be pass that actually provide individual with autism with resource , with access to educational material that would help they . with that increase awareness , more parent , more pediatrician , more educator learn to recognize the feature of autism . as a result of that , more individual be diagnose and get access to the resource they need . in addition , we 've change our definition over time , so in fact we 've widen the definition of autism , and that account for some of the increase prevalence that we see .     the next question everyone wonder be , what cause autism ? and a common misconception be that vaccine cause autism . but let I be very clear : vaccine do not cause autism . ( applause ) in fact , the original research study that suggest that be the case be completely fraudulent . it be actually retract from the journal lancet , in which it be publish , and that author , a physician , have his medical license take away from he . ( applause ) the institute of medicine , the center for disease control , have repeatedly investigate this and there be no credible evidence that vaccine cause autism . furthermore , one of the ingredient in vaccine , something call thimerosal , be think to be what the cause of autism be . that be actually remove from vaccine in the year 1992 , and you can see that it really do not have an effect in what happen with the prevalence of autism . so again , there be no evidence that this be the answer . so the question remain , what do cause autism ?     in fact , there be probably not one single answer . just as autism be a spectrum , there be a spectrum of etiology , a spectrum of cause . base on epidemiological datum , we know that one of the cause , or one of the association , I should say , be advanced paternal age , that is , increase age of the father at the time of conception . in addition , another vulnerable and critical period in term of development be when the mother be pregnant . during that period , while the fetal brain be develop , we know that exposure to certain agent can actually increase the risk of autism . in particular , there be a medication , valproic acid , which mother with epilepsy sometimes take , we know can increase that risk of autism . in addition , there can be some infectious agent that can also cause autism .     and one of the thing I be go to spend a lot of time focus on be the gene that can cause autism . I be focus on this not because gene be the only cause of autism , but it be a cause of autism that we can readily define and be able to well understand the biology and understand well how the brain work so that we can come up with strategy to be able to intervene . one of the genetic factor that we do not understand , however , be the difference that we see in term of male and female . male be affect four to one compare to female with autism , and we really do not understand what that cause be .     one of the way that we can understand that genetic be a factor be by look at something call the concordance rate . in other word , if one sibling have autism , what be the probability that another sible in that family will have autism ? and we can look in particular at three type of sibling : identical twin , twin that actually share 100 percent of their genetic information and share the same intrauterine environment , versus fraternal twin , twin that actually share 50 percent of their genetic information , versus regular sibling , brother - sister , sister - sister , also share 50 percent of their genetic information , yet not share the same intrauterine environment . and when you look at those concordance ratio , one of the striking thing that you will see be that in identical twin , that concordance rate be 77 percent . remarkably , though , it be not 100 percent . it be not that gene account for all of the risk for autism , but yet they account for a lot of that risk , because when you look at fraternal twin , that concordance rate be only 31 percent . on the other hand , there be a difference between those fraternal twin and the sibling , suggest that there be common exposure for those fraternal twin that may not be share as commonly with sibling alone .     so this provide some of the datum that autism be genetic . well , how genetic be it ? when we compare it to other condition that we be familiar with , thing like cancer , heart disease , diabetes , in fact , genetic play a much large role in autism than it do in any of these other condition . but with this , that do not tell we what the gene be . it do not even tell we in any one child , be it one gene or potentially a combination of gene ? and so in fact , in some individual with autism , it be genetic ! that is , that it be one single , powerful , deterministic gene that cause the autism . however , in other individual , it be genetic , that is , that it be actually a combination of gene in part with the developmental process that ultimately determine that risk for autism . we do not know in any one person , necessarily , which of those two answer it be until we start dig deeply .     so the question become , how can we start to identify what exactly those gene be . and let I pose something that might not be intuitive . in certain individual , they can have autism for a reason that be genetic but yet not because of autism run in the family . and the reason be because in certain individual , they can actually have genetic change or mutation that be not pass down from the mother or from the father , but actually start brand new in they , mutation that be present in the egg or the sperm at the time of conception but have not be pass down generation through generation within the family . and we can actually use that strategy to now understand and to identify those gene cause autism in those individual . so in fact , at the simon foundation , we take 2,600 individual that have no family history of autism , and we take that child and their mother and father and use they to try and understand what be those gene cause autism in those case ? to do that , we actually have to comprehensively be able to look at all that genetic information and determine what those difference be between the mother , the father and the child . in do so , I apologize , I be go to use an outdated analogy of encyclopedias rather than wikipedia , but I be go to do so to try and help make the point that as we do this inventory , we need to be able to look at massive amount of information . our genetic information be organize into a set of 46 volume , and when we do that , we have to be able to account for each of those 46 volume , because in some case with autism , there be actually a single volume that be miss . we have to get more granular than that , though , and so we have to start open those book , and in some case , the genetic change be more subtle . it might have be a single paragraph that be miss , or yet , even more subtle than that , a single letter , one out of three billion letter that be change , that be alter , yet have profound effect in term of how the brain function and affect behavior . in do this within these family , we be able to account for approximately 25 percent of the individual and determine that there be a single powerful genetic factor that cause autism within those family . on the other hand , there be 75 percent that we still have not figure out .     as we do this , though , it be really quite humble , because we realize that there be not simply one gene for autism . in fact , the current estimate be that there be 200 to 400 different gene that can cause autism . and that explain , in part , why we see such a broad spectrum in term of its effect . although there be that many gene , there be some method to the madness . it be not simply random 200 , 400 different gene , but in fact they fit together . they fit together in a pathway . they fit together in a network that be start to make sense now in term of how the brain function . we be start to have a bottom - up approach where we be identify those gene , those protein , those molecule , understand how they interact together to make that neuron work , understand how those neuron interact together to make circuit work , and understand how those circuit work to now control behavior , and understand that both in individual with autism as well as individual who have normal cognition . but early diagnosis be a key for we . be able to make that diagnosis of someone who be susceptible at a time in a window where we have the ability to transform , to be able to impact that grow , develop brain be critical . and so folk like ami klin have develop method to be able to take infant , small baby , and be able to use biomarker , in this case eye contact and eye tracking , to identify an infant at risk . this particular infant , you can see , make very good eye contact with this woman as she be singe " itsy , bitsy spider , " in fact be not go to develop autism . this baby we know be go to be in the clear . on the other hand , this other baby be go to go on to develop autism . in this particular child , you can see , it be not make good eye contact . instead of the eye focus in and have that social connection , look at the mouth , look at the nose , look off in another direction , but not again socially connect , and be able to do this on a very large scale , screen infant , screen child for autism , through something very robust , very reliable , be go to be very helpful to we in term of be able to intervene at an early stage when we can have the great impact .     how be we go to intervene ? it be probably go to be a combination of factor . in part , in some individual , we be go to try and use medication . and so in fact , identify the gene for autism be important for we to identify drug target , to identify thing that we might be able to impact and can be certain that that be really what we need to do in autism . but that be not go to be the only answer . beyond just drug , we be go to use educational strategy . individual with autism , some of they be wire a little bit differently . they learn in a different way . they absorb their surrounding in a different way , and we need to be able to educate they in a way that serve they well . beyond that , there be a lot of individual in this room who have great idea in term of new technology we can use , everything from device we can use to train the brain to be able to make it more efficient and to compensate for area in which it have a little bit of trouble , to even thing like google glass . you could imagine , for instance , gabriel , with his social awkwardness , might be able to wear google glass with an earpiece in his ear , and have a coach be able to help he , be able to help think about conversation , conversation - starter , be able to even perhaps one day invite a girl out on a date .     all of these new technology just offer tremendous opportunity for we to be able to impact the individual with autism , but yet we have a long way to go . as much as we know , there be so much more that we do not know , and so I invite all of you to be able to help we think about how to do this well , to use as a community our collective wisdom to be able to make a difference , and in particular , for the individual in family with autism , I invite you to join the interactive autism network , to be part of the solution to this , because it be go to take really a lot of we to think about what be important , what be go to be a meaningful difference . as we think about something that be potentially a solution , how well do it work ? be it something that be really go to make a difference in your life , as an individual , as a family with autism ? we be go to need individual of all age , from the young to the old , and with all different shape and size of the autism spectrum disorder to make sure that we can have an impact . so I invite all of you to join the mission and to help to be able to make the life of individual with autism so much well and so much rich . thank you . ( applause )  
   first of all , for those of you who be not familiar with my work , I create multicultural character , so character from lot of different background . so before the present be the new future , a bit about the past be that I grow up in a family that be multi - everything — multi - racial , multi - cultural , black and white , caribbean , irish - american , german - american . there be dominican music blast from stereo . there be christian and jews . that be a long story fill with intrigue and interfaith guilt and shame . but I be totally immerse in this world that be fill with everybody , and then I go on to the united nations school , and that just completely —     so I begin sort of develop these voice and these people , all of whom be loosely base on people I really know , and so , for example , in perform they , I would really try to inhabit they . and for example , I do not really talk like that , but that be one of my people , and I be go to bring a few of my friend — I think of they as my friend — to this stage , in this spirit of the idea that the present be the new future , in sort of a meta way , because I think about it , and the future , for I , what can be so frightening be that I do not know what be come . I do not know if that be true for other people , but that notion of think about how we can understand the future and predict outcome , for I , it be terrify to not know what might be come . and so the idea that there be question that I 've never see that my people be go to answer , and some of these character have be with I for age , some of they do not even have name , I do not know what be go to happen . I do not know what be come , and all I can do be remind myself that I tell chris I would fly by the seat of my pant , and now that I be up here it sort of feel like that dream where you do not have any pant on , and so I suppose I be go to be fly by the seat of my ass .     that say , let us just see who come out . may we have the first question :     " do you ever get headache from the microchip implant in your brain ? " right .     okay . well first of all , I 'll just say that I hope you can hear I okay . my name be lorraine levine , and the idea of microchip implant in my brain , frankly , just put on my glass remind I of thank god I be not wear the google glass . no offense to they . I be glad that you all enjoy they , but at my age , just put on the regular one I have already give I too much information . do you understand what I be say to you ? I do not need to know more . I do not want to know . that be it . that be enough . I love you all . you be wonderful . it be fabulous to be here with such big macher again this year . mwah !     okay , next question . ( applause ) next , please .     " be date boring , now that human reproduce asexually ? "     who do we get ?     hi , um , okay , hi everybody . my name be nereida . I just want to say first of all that date be never bore under any circumstance . but I be very excited to be here right now , so I be just try to remind myself that , you know , like , the purpose of be here and everything , I mean , try to answer these question , it be very exciting . but I also , I just need to acknowledge that ted be an incredible experience right now in the present , like , I just need to say , like , isabel allende . isabel allende ! okay , maybe it do not mean , of course it mean something to you , but to I , it be like , another level , okay ? because I be latina and I really appreciate the fact that there be role model here that I can really , I do not know , I just need to say that . that be incredible to I , and sometimes when I be nervous and everything like that , I just need to , like , say some affirmation that can help I . I usually just try to use , like , the three little word that always make I feel well : sotomayor , sotomayor , sotomayor . ( laughter ) just , it really help I to get ground . now I can use allende , allende , allende , and , you know , I just need to say it , like , it be so incredible to be here , and I know that we be go to have these question . I be so nervous and I be think just , like , oh my god , oh my god , and remind I , because I 've have , like , some very , especially since the last time we be here at ted , it be , like , unbelievable , and then right after that , like , so many crazy thing happen , like , we end up go to the white house to perform . that be , like , amazing , and I be stand there , and I be just like , please do not say , " oh my god . " do not say , " oh my god . " and I just keep say it : " oh my god . oh my god . " and , you know , I keep think to myself , like , president obama have to come up here at the same podium , and I be stand here say , " oh my god . " it be like , the separation of church and state . it be just , I could not , like , I could not process . it be really too much . so I think I 've lose my way . but what I want to say be that date , for I , you know , as far as I be concern , however you reproduce , as long as you be enjoy yourself and it be with another consent asexual — I do not know . you know where I be go with that . okay , ciao , gracias .     okay , next question . ( applause )     what be your top five favorite song right now ?     all right , well first of all , i'mma say , you know what I be say , I be the only dude up here right now . my name be rashid , and I never be at ted before , you know what I be say . I think , sarah jones , maybe she do not want I to come out last time . I do not know why . you know what I be say . obviously I would be like a perfect fit for ted . you know what I be say . first of all , that I be in hip hop , you know what I be say . I know some of you all may be not really as much into the music , but the first way you all can always know , you know what I be say , that I be in hip hop , be 'cos I hold the microphone in an official emcee posture . you all can see that right there . that be how you hold it . all right , so you get your little tutorial right there . but when sarah jones tell I we be going to come up here , I be like , betch , you know what I be say , ted be real fly , I get a whole lot of dope , you know what I be say , shit go on and everything , but she be like , yeah , we be go to have to answer , like , some random question , just like , and I be like , what the hell be that ? you know what I be say , just stand up there and answer some random question ? I do not want to , I mean , it be like an intellectual stop - and - frisk . you know what I be say ? ( laughter ) I do not want to be stand up there just all getting interrogate and whatnot . that be what I be try to leave behind in new york . you know what I be say ? so anyway , I would have to say my top five song right now be all out of my own personal catalogue , you know what I mean ? so if you want to know more about that , you know what I be say , we could talk about the anti - piracy and all that , but as far as I be concern , you know , I believe in creative common , and I think it be really important that , you know , that need to be sustainable and everything , and I mean , as far as I be concern , I mean , this right here , this environment , I would like to sustain . you know what I mean ? but I be just say , if you all be interested in the top five song , you need to holler at I . you know what I be say ? aight ? in the future or the present . yeah . enjoy the rest of it .     okay , next question .     what do you get ?     " how many of your organ have be 3d print ? " ( laughter )     well I have to say that I do not know about how many of my organ have be 3 - d print as such , but I can tell you that it be so challenging to I , kind of think about this concept of the future and that , you know , all around the world parent be kind of tell their small child , please , you have to eat that , you know , I have slave over a hot 3d printer all day so that you can have this meal . you know , that kind of thing . and of course now that we have change , you know , from the global south , there be this total kind of perspective shift that be happen around the — you can not just say to they , well , there be starve child . well , it be the future . nobody be starve anymore , thank god . but as you can tell I have kind of that optimism , and I do hope that we can continue to kind of 3d print , well , let we just say I like to think that even in the future we will have the publication , kind of , you know , all the food that be fit to print . but everybody , please do enjoy that , and again , I think that you do throw a crack good party here at ted . thank you .     next question . ( applause )     what have change ? okay , it be like , I have to think about that . " what have change now that woman run the world ? " first of all , I really , like , I just want to say , and my name be bella , I just want to , like , identify myself , that , like , as a feminist , I , like , I really find that , like , because I be bear in the ' 90 , and , like , there be a lot of woman who be as far as feminism be concern , like , maybe they do not understand that , like , a feminist like I , like , I do not think it be require that you have to have a certain kind of voice , or , like , a certain way of present yourself to be feminist , because I think that , like , feminism can be really hot , and I think actually that it be really vital and important . like , the quotation I be wear be from , like , gloria steinem , and , like , I be name bella for , like , bella abzug , who be , like , obviously , like , a really important feminist from , like , history , and like , I just think that those woman , like , really represent , like , that you can , like , be vital and , like , amazing , like , a - maze , and you do not have to wear , like , an eileen fisher caftan , just to , like , prove that you be a feminist . like , not that there be anything wrong with that , but my mom , she be like , like , why do you have to wear pant that , like , objectify your body ? I like my pant . like , I like my voice . like , she be like , why do you have to talk like — talk like what ? like , I be express myself , and I think that we have to , like , reach out , like , not only across , like , the different generation of feminist , but also across the , like , vocal range , so that , like , we , because otherwise it be just , like , restriculous within feminism , which be just , like , a word that I create that mean , like , so strict it be ridiculous . so that be my feeling about that . you guy be a - maze , by the way .     okay . next question . ( applause )     [ " they 've discover a cure for cancer , but not baldness ? what be up with that ? " ]     yeah , you know what , so my name be joseph mancuso . first of all , I just want to say that I appreciate that ted in general have be a pretty orderly crowd , a pretty orderly group . and , you know , I just have to say , the whole thing with baldness , and , you know , here be the thing . as long as the woman , in my case — because it be a modern world , do whatever you want to do , I do not have any problem with anybody , enjoy yourself , lgbtqlmnop . all right ? but as far as I be concerned , attractiveness , woman do not really care as much as you think they do about the , you know . I mean , I remember hear this woman . she love her husband , it be the sweet thing . it be a pretty young girl , you know ? and this guy 's old . and , you know , she say she would love he even if he have snow on the roof or even if melt and disappear altogether . as far as I be concern , it be about the love . be I right , or be I right ? so that be it . that be it . that be it . I do not got nothing more to say . keep your nose clean .     all right , next question .     " have you ever taste meat that be not lab grow ? "     um , well , I , I want to start by say that this be a very difficult experience for a chinese - american . I do not know what to call myself now , because I have really my chinese identity , but my kid , they be american - chinese , but it be difficult to try to express myself in front of audience of people like this . but if have to give my opinion about meat , I think first , the most important thing be to say that we do not have to have perfect food , but maybe it can also not be poison . maybe we can have some middle ground for that . but I will continue to consider this idea , and I will report back maybe next year .     next . next . next . ( applause )     " will there ever be a post - racial world ? "     thank you for have I . my name be gary weaselhead . enjoy that . I be a member of the blackfeet nation . I be also half lakota , but that be my give name , and no , even though it would have seem like an obvious choice , no , I do not go into politic . tough crowd . ( laughter ) but I always like to just let people know when they ask about race or those kind of thing , you know , as a member of the first nation community , you know , I be probably not your typical guy . for example , in addition to be an activist , I be also a professional stand - up comedian . ( laughter ) and , you know , I be most popular on college and university campus . you know , whenever they want to do a diversity day , or hey - we're - not - all - white week , then I be there . ( laughter ) do I think there will ever be a post - racial world ? I think , really , I can not talk about race without remember that it be a construct in certain respect , but also that , you know , until we redress the wrong of the past , we be go to be turn around . I do not care if the present be the new future . I think there be a lot of great people here at ted who be work to address that , so with that , if anything I 've say today make you feel uncomfortable , you be welcome . ( applause )     I think we have time for one more .     " what be the most popular diet these day ? "     who be here ?     okay , well , I be just going to answer this really fast , as , like , three or four different people . I mean really fast . I be just going to let you all know that , as far as diet be concern , if you do not love yourself inside , there be no diet on this earth that be go to make your behind small enough for you to feel good , so just stop waste your time .     I would just like to say as an african woman that I believe the diet that we need be really to remove the crazy belief that there be anything wrong with a nice backside . no , I be tease about that . there be nothing wrong with a woman of size . that be what I be try to say . woman , celebrate your body , for god 's sake . stop run around starve . you be make yourself and other people miserable .     last answer .     so we be talk about what be the most popular diet ? I be going to start off by tell you all that this be my first time here at ted . I might not be your typical person you find on this stage . my dental work not as nice as some people . but I make sarah jones promise she going to bring I this time , 'cause she do not bring I before , but you know , I just want to say , there be a lot of thing more important than count calorie , and as somebody live on the street in new york , and get to come here , hear you all idea worth spread , I want to tell you all I believe in this idea that the present be the new future , that where you sit , you create everything that be going to come , for well or bad . and for I , I think homeless be the wrong word for it anyway . you know , I might not have I no place to lay my head at night , but that just make I houseless . I have I a home . you do too . find it and try to find yourself in there . make sure you know , it be not just about virtual reality in space . that be wonderful , but it be also about the actual reality here on earth . how be people live today ? how can you be part of the solution ? thank you all for think about that right now in the present moment to influence the future . I appreciate it . bye - bye .     ( applause )     thank you all very , very much . thank you for trust I , chris .     ( applause )  
   so it be 2006 . my friend harold ford call I . he be run for u.s . senate in tennessee , and he say , " mellody , I desperately need some national press . do you have any idea ? " so I have an idea . I call a friend who be in new york at one of the most successful medium company in the world , and she say , " why do not we host an editorial board lunch for harold ? you come with he . "     harold and I arrive in new york . we be in our good suit . we look like shiny new penny . and we get to the receptionist , and we say , " we be here for the lunch . " she motion for we to follow she . we walk through a series of corridor , and all of a sudden we find ourselves in a stark room , at which point she look at we and she say , " where be your uniform ? "     just as this happen , my friend rush in . the blood drain from her face . there be literally no word , right ? and I look at she , and I say , " now , do not you think we need more than one black person in the u.s . senate ? "     now harold and I — ( applause ) — we still laugh about that story , and in many way , the moment catch I off guard , but deep , deep down inside , I actually be not surprised . and I be not surprised because of something my mother teach I about 30 year before . you see , my mother be ruthlessly realistic . I remember one day come home from a birthday party where I be the only black kid invite , and instead of ask I the normal motherly question like , " do you have fun ? " or " how be the cake ? " my mother look at I and she say , " how do they treat you ? " I be seven . I do not understand . I mean , why would anyone treat I differently ? but she know . and she look I right in the eye and she say , " they will not always treat you well . "     now , race be one of those topic in america that make people extraordinarily uncomfortable . you bring it up at a dinner party or in a workplace environment , it be literally the conversational equivalent of touch the third rail . there be shock , follow by a long silence . and even come here today , I tell some friend and colleague that I plan to talk about race , and they warn I , they tell I , do not do it , that there would be huge risk in I talk about this topic , that people might think I be a militant black woman and I would ruin my career . and I have to tell you , I actually for a moment be a bit afraid . then I realize , the first step to solve any problem be to not hide from it , and the first step to any form of action be awareness . and so I decide to actually talk about race . and I decide that if I come here and share with you some of my experience , that maybe we could all be a little less anxious and a little more bold in our conversation about race .     now I know there be people out there who will say that the election of barack obama mean that it be the end of racial discrimination for all eternity , right ? but I work in the investment business , and we have a saying : the number do not lie . and here , there be significant , quantifiable racial disparity that can not be ignore , in household wealth , household income , job opportunity , healthcare . one example from corporate america : even though white man make up just 30 percent of the u.s . population , they hold 70 percent of all corporate board seat . of the fortune 250 , there be only seven ceo that be minority , and of the thousand of publicly trade company today , thousand , only two be chair by black woman , and you be look at one of they , the same one who , not too long ago , be nearly mistaken for kitchen help . so that be a fact . now I have this think experiment that I play with myself , when I say , imagine if I walk you into a room and it be of a major corporation , like exxonmobil , and every single person around the boardroom be black , you would think that be weird . but if I walk you into a fortune 500 company , and everyone around the table be a white male , when will it be that we think that be weird too ?     and I know how we get here . ( applause )     I know how we get here . you know , there be institutionalize , at one time legalize , discrimination in our country . there be no question about it . but still , as I grapple with this issue , my mother 's question hang in the air for I : how do they treat you ?     now , I do not raise this issue to complain or in any way to elicit any kind of sympathy . I have succeed in my life beyond my wild expectation , and I have be treat well by people of all race more often than I have not . I tell the uniform story because it happen . I cite those statistic around corporate board diversity because they be real , and I stand here today talk about this issue of racial discrimination because I believe it threaten to rob another generation of all the opportunity that all of we want for all of our child , no matter what their color or where they come from . and I think it also threaten to hold back business . you see , researcher have coin this term " color blindness " to describe a learned behavior where we pretend that we do not notice race . if you happen to be surround by a bunch of people who look like you , that be purely accidental . now , color blindness , in my view , do not mean that there be no racial discrimination , and there be fairness . it do not mean that at all . it do not ensure it . in my view , color blindness be very dangerous because it mean we be ignore the problem . there be a corporate study that say that , instead of avoid race , the really smart corporation actually deal with it head on . they actually recognize that embrace diversity mean recognize all race , include the majority one . but I 'll be the first one to tell you , this subject matter can be hard , awkward , uncomfortable — but that be kind of the point .     in the spirit of debunk racial stereotype , the one that black people do not like to swim , I be go to tell you how much I love to swim . I love to swim so much that as an adult , I swim with a coach . and one day my coach have I do a drill where I have to swim to one end of a 25 - meter pool without take a breath . and every single time I fail , I have to start over . and I fail a lot . by the end , I get it , but when I get out of the pool , I be exasperate and tired and annoyed , and I say , " why be we do breath - hold exercise ? " and my coach look I at I , and he say , " mellody , that be not a breath - hold exercise . that drill be to make you comfortable be uncomfortable , because that be how most of we spend our day . " if we can learn to deal with our discomfort , and just relax into it , we 'll have a well life .     so I think it be time for we to be comfortable with the uncomfortable conversation about race : black , white , asian , hispanic , male , female , all of we , if we truly believe in equal right and equal opportunity in america , I think we have to have real conversation about this issue . we can not afford to be color blind . we have to be color brave . we have to be willing , as teacher and parent and entrepreneur and scientist , we have to be willing to have proactive conversation about race with honesty and understanding and courage , not because it be the right thing to do , but because it be the smart thing to do , because our business and our product and our science , our research , all of that will be well with great diversity .     now , my favorite example of color bravery be a guy name john skipper . he run espn . he be a north carolina native , quintessential southern gentleman , white . he join espn , which already have a culture of inclusion and diversity , but he take it up a notch . he demand that every open position have a diverse slate of candidate . now he say the senior people in the beginning bristle , and they would come to he and say , " do you want I to hire the minority , or do you want I to hire the good person for the job ? " and skipper say his answer be always the same : " yes . " and by say yes to diversity , I honestly believe that espn be the most valuable cable franchise in the world . I think that be a part of the secret sauce .     now I can tell you , in my own industry , at ariel investment , we actually view our diversity as a competitive advantage , and that advantage can extend way beyond business . there be a guy name scott page at the university of michigan . he be the first person to develop a mathematical calculation for diversity . he say , if you be try to solve a really hard problem , really hard , that you should have a diverse group of people , include those with diverse intellect . the example that he give be the smallpox epidemic . when it be ravage europe , they bring together all these scientist , and they be stumped . and the beginning of the cure to the disease come from the most unlikely source , a dairy farmer who notice that the milkmaid be not get smallpox . and the smallpox vaccination be bovine - base because of that dairy farmer .     now I be sure you be sit here and you be say , I do not run a cable company , I do not run an investment firm , I be not a dairy farmer . what can I do ? and I be tell you , you can be color brave . if you be part of a hiring process or an admission process , you can be color brave . if you be try to solve a really hard problem , you can speak up and be color brave . now I know people will say , but that do not add up to a lot , but I be actually ask you to do something really simple : observe your environment , at work , at school , at home . I be ask you to look at the people around you purposefully and intentionally . invite people into your life who do not look like you , do not think like you , do not act like you , do not come from where you come from , and you might find that they will challenge your assumption and make you grow as a person . you might get powerful new insight from these individual , or , like my husband , who happen to be white , you might learn that black people , man , woman , child , we use body lotion every single day .     now , I also think that this be very important so that the next generation really understand that this progress will help they , because they be expect we to be great role model .     now , I tell you , my mother , she be ruthlessly realistic . she be an unbelievable role model . she be the kind of person who get to be the way she be because she be a single mom with six kid in chicago . she be in the real estate business , where she work extraordinarily hard but oftentime have a hard time make end meet . and that mean sometimes we get our phone disconnected , or our light turn off , or we got evict . when we got evict , sometimes we live in these small apartment that she own , sometimes in only one or two room , because they be not complete , and we would heat our bathwater on hot plate . but she never give up hope , ever , and she never allow we to give up hope either . this brutal pragmatism that she have , I mean , I be four and she tell I , " mommy be santa . " ( laughter ) she be this brutal pragmatism . she teach I so many lesson , but the most important lesson be that every single day she tell I , " mellody , you can be anything . " and because of those word , I would wake up at the crack of dawn , and because of those word , I would love school more than anything , and because of those word , when I be on a bus go to school , I dream the big dream . and it be because of those word that I stand here right now full of passion , ask you to be brave for the kid who be dream those dream today . ( applause )     you see , I want they to look at a ceo on television and say , " I can be like she , " or , " he look like I . " and I want they to know that anything be possible , that they can achieve the high level that they ever imagine , that they will be welcome in any corporate boardroom , or they can lead any company . you see this idea of be the land of the free and the home of the brave , it be weave into the fabric of america . america , when we have a challenge , we take it head on , we do not shrink away from it . we take a stand . we show courage . so right now , what I be ask you to do , I be ask you to show courage . I be ask you to be bold . as business leader , I be ask you not to leave anything on the table . as citizen , I be ask you not to leave any child behind . I be ask you not to be color blind , but to be color brave , so that every child know that their future matter and their dream be possible .     thank you .     ( applause ) thank you . thank . thank . ( applause )  
   I study ant in the desert , in the tropical forest and in my kitchen , and in the hill around silicon valley where I live . I 've recently realize that ant be use interaction differently in different environment , and that get I think that we could learn from this about other system , like brain and datum network that we engineer , and even cancer .     so what all these system have in common be that there be no central control . an ant colony consist of sterile female worker — those be the ant you see walk around — and then one or more reproductive female who just lie the egg . they do not give any instruction . even though they be call queen , they do not tell anybody what to do . so in an ant colony , there be no one in charge , and all system like this without central control be regulate use very simple interaction . ant interact use smell . they smell with their antennae , and they interact with their antennae , so when one ant touch another with its antennae , it can tell , for example , if the other ant be a nestmate and what task that other ant have be do . so here you see a lot of ant move around and interact in a lab arena that be connect by tube to two other arena . so when one ant meet another , it do not matter which ant it meet , and they be actually not transmit any kind of complicated signal or message . all that matter to the ant be the rate at which it meet other ant . and all of these interaction , take together , produce a network . so this be the network of the ant that you just see move around in the arena , and it be this constantly shift network that produce the behavior of the colony , like whether all the ant be hide inside the nest , or how many be go out to forage . a brain actually work in the same way , but what be great about ant be that you can see the whole network as it happen .     there be more than 12,000 specie of ant , in every conceivable environment , and they be use interaction differently to meet different environmental challenge . so one important environmental challenge that every system have to deal with be operate cost , just what it take to run the system . and another environmental challenge be resource , find they and collect they . in the desert , operating cost be high because water be scarce , and the seed - eat ant that I study in the desert have to spend water to get water . so an ant outside forage , search for seed in the hot sun , just lose water into the air . but the colony get its water by metabolize the fat out of the seed that they eat . so in this environment , interaction be use to activate forage . an outgoing forager do not go out unless it get enough interaction with return forager , and what you see be the return forager go into the tunnel , into the nest , and meet outgoing forager on their way out . this make sense for the ant colony , because the more food there be out there , the more quickly the forager find it , the fast they come back , and the more forager they send out . the system work to stay stop , unless something positive happen .     so interaction function to activate forager . and we 've be study the evolution of this system . first of all , there be variation . it turn out that colony be different . on dry day , some colony forage less , so colony be different in how they manage this trade - off between spend water to search for seed and get water back in the form of seed . and we be try to understand why some colony forage less than other by think about ant as neuron , use model from neuroscience . so just as a neuron add up its stimulation from other neuron to decide whether to fire , an ant add up its stimulation from other ant to decide whether to forage . and what we be look for be whether there might be small difference among colony in how many interaction each ant need before it be willing to go out and forage , because a colony like that would forage less .     and this raise an analogous question about brain . we talk about the brain , but of course every brain be slightly different , and maybe there be some individual or some condition in which the electrical property of neuron be such that they require more stimulus to fire , and that would lead to difference in brain function .     so in order to ask evolutionary question , we need to know about reproductive success . this be a map of the study site where I have be track this population of harvester ant colony for 28 year , which be about as long as a colony live . each symbol be a colony , and the size of the symbol be how many offspring it have , because we be able to use genetic variation to match up parent and offspring colony , that be , to figure out which colony be found by a daughter queen produce by which parent colony . and this be amazing for I , after all these year , to find out , for example , that colony 154 , whom I 've know well for many year , be a great - grandmother . here be her daughter colony , here be her granddaughter colony , and these be her great - granddaughter colony . and by do this , I be able to learn that offspring colony resemble parent colony in their decision about which day be so hot that they do not forage , and the offspring of parent colony live so far from each other that the ant never meet , so the ant of the offspring colony can not be learn this from the parent colony . and so our next step be to look for the genetic variation underlie this resemblance .     so then I be able to ask , okay , who be do well ? over the time of the study , and especially in the past 10 year , there be be a very severe and deepening drought in the southwestern u.s . , and it turn out that the colony that conserve water , that stay in when it be really hot outside , and thus sacrifice get as much food as possible , be the one more likely to have offspring colony . so all this time , I think that colony 154 be a loser , because on really dry day , there would be just this trickle of foraging , while the other colony be out forage , get lot of food , but in fact , colony 154 be a huge success . she be a matriarch . she be one of the rare great - grandmother on the site . to my knowledge , this be the first time that we 've be able to track the ongoing evolution of collective behavior in a natural population of animal and find out what be actually work well .     now , the internet use an algorithm to regulate the flow of datum that be very similar to the one that the harvester ant be use to regulate the flow of forager . and guess what we call this analogy ? the anternet be come . ( applause ) so data do not leave the source computer unless it get a signal that there be enough bandwidth for it to travel on . in the early day of the internet , when operating cost be really high and it be really important not to lose any datum , then the system be set up for interaction to activate the flow of datum . it be interesting that the ant be use an algorithm that be so similar to the one that we recently invent , but this be only one of a handful of ant algorithm that we know about , and ant have have 130 million year to evolve a lot of good one , and I think it be very likely that some of the other 12,000 specie be go to have interesting algorithm for datum network that we have not even think of yet .     so what happen when operating cost be low ? operating cost be low in the tropic , because it be very humid , and it be easy for the ant to be outside walk around . but the ant be so abundant and diverse in the tropic that there be a lot of competition . whatever resource one specie be use , another species be likely to be use that at the same time . so in this environment , interaction be use in the opposite way . the system keep go unless something negative happen , and one specie that I study make circuit in the tree of forage ant go from the nest to a food source and back , just round and round , unless something negative happen , like an interaction with ant of another specie . so here be an example of ant security . in the middle , there be an ant plug the nest entrance with its head in response to interaction with another specie . those be the little one run around with their abdomen up in the air . but as soon as the threat be pass , the entrance be open again , and maybe there be situation in computer security where operating cost be low enough that we could just block access temporarily in response to an immediate threat , and then open it again , instead of try to build a permanent firewall or fortress .     so another environmental challenge that all system have to deal with be resource , find and collect they . and to do this , ant solve the problem of collective search , and this be a problem that be of great interest right now in robotic , because we 've understand that , rather than send a single , sophisticated , expensive robot out to explore another planet or to search a burn building , that instead , it may be more effective to get a group of cheap robot exchange only minimal information , and that be the way that ant do it . so the invasive argentine ant make expandable search network . they be good at deal with the main problem of collective search , which be the trade - off between search very thoroughly and cover a lot of ground . and what they do be , when there be many ant in a small space , then each one can search very thoroughly because there will be another ant nearby search over there , but when there be a few ant in a large space , then they need to stretch out their path to cover more ground . I think they use interaction to assess density , so when they be really crowd , they meet more often , and they search more thoroughly . different ant specie must use different algorithm , because they 've evolve to deal with different resource , and it could be really useful to know about this , and so we recently ask ant to solve the collective search problem in the extreme environment of microgravity in the international space station . when I first see this picture , I think , oh no , they 've mount the habitat vertically , but then I realize that , of course , it do not matter . so the idea here be that the ant be work so hard to hang on to the wall or the floor or whatever you call it that they be less likely to interact , and so the relationship between how crowded they be and how often they meet would be mess up . we be still analyze the datum . I do not have the result yet . but it would be interesting to know how other specie solve this problem in different environment on earth , and so we be set up a program to encourage kid around the world to try this experiment with different specie . it be very simple . it can be do with cheap material . and that way , we could make a global map of ant collective search algorithm . and I think it be pretty likely that the invasive specie , the one that come into our building , be go to be really good at this , because they be in your kitchen because they be really good at find food and water .     so the most familiar resource for ant be a picnic , and this be a clustered resource . when there be one piece of fruit , there be likely to be another piece of fruit nearby , and the ant that specialize on cluster resource use interaction for recruitment . so when one ant meet another , or when it meet a chemical deposit on the ground by another , then it change direction to follow in the direction of the interaction , and that be how you get the trail of ant share your picnic .     now this be a place where I think we might be able to learn something from ant about cancer . I mean , first , it be obvious that we could do a lot to prevent cancer by not allow people to spread around or sell the toxin that promote the evolution of cancer in our body , but I do not think the ant can help we much with this because ant never poison their own colony . but we might be able to learn something from ant about treat cancer . there be many different kind of cancer . each one originate in a particular part of the body , and then some kind of cancer will spread or metastasize to particular other tissue where they must be get resource that they need . so if you think from the perspective of early metastatic cancer cell as they be out search around for the resource that they need , if those resource be cluster , they be likely to use interaction for recruitment , and if we can figure out how cancer cell be recruit , then maybe we could set trap to catch they before they become establish .     so ant be use interaction in different way in a huge variety of environment , and we could learn from this about other system that operate without central control . use only simple interaction , ant colony have be perform amazing feat for more than 130 million year . we have a lot to learn from they .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   as a little girl , I always imagine I would one day run away . from the age of six on , I keep a pack bag with some clothe and can of food tuck away in the back of a closet . there be a deep restlessness in I , a primal fear that I would fall prey to a life of routine and boredom . and so , many of my early memory involve intricate daydream where I would walk across border , forage for berry , and meet all kind of strange people live unconventional life on the road .     year have pass , but many of the adventure I fantasize about as a child — travel and weave my way between world other than my own — have become reality through my work as a documentary photographer . but no other experience have feel as true to my childhood dream as live amongst and document the life of fellow wanderer across the united states . this be the nomadic dream , a different kind of american dream live by young hobo , traveler , hitchhiker , vagrant and tramp .     in most of our mind , the vagabond be a creature from the past . the word " hobo " conjure up an old black and white image of a weather old man cover in coal , leg dangle out of a boxcar , but these photograph be in color , and they portray a community swirl across the country , fiercely alive and creatively free , see side of america that no one else get to see .     like their predecessor , today 's nomad travel the steel and asphalt artery of the united states . by day , they hop freight train , stick out their thumb , and ride the highway with anyone from trucker to soccer mom . by night , they sleep beneath the star , huddle together with their pack of dog , cat and pet rat between their body .     some traveler take to the road by choice , renounce materialism , traditional job and university degree in exchange   for a glimmer of adventure . other come from the underbelly of society , never give a chance to mobilize upwards : foster care dropout , teenage runaway escape abuse and unforgiving home .     where other see story of privation and economic failure , traveler view their own existence through the prism of liberation and freedom . they would rather live off of the excess of what they view as a wasteful consumer society than slave away at an unrealistic chance at the traditional american dream . they take advantage of the fact that in the united states , up to 40 percent of all food end up in the garbage by scavenge for perfectly good produce in dumpster and trash can . they sacrifice material comfort in exchange for the space and the time to explore a creative interior , to dream , to read , to work on music , art and writing .     but there be many aspect to this life that be far from idyllic . no one lose their inner demon by take to the road . addiction be real , the element be real , freight train maim and kill , and anyone who have live on the street can attest to the exhaustive list of law that criminalize homeless existence . who here know that in many city across the united states it be now illegal to sit on the sidewalk , to wrap oneself in a blanket , to sleep in your own car , to offer food to a stranger ? I know about these law because I 've watch as friend and other traveler be haul off to jail or receive citation for commit these so - call crime .     many of you might be wonder why anyone would choose a life like this , under the thumb of discriminatory law , eat out of trash can , sleep under bridge , pick up seasonal job here and there . the answer to such a question be as varied as the people that take to the road , but traveler often respond with a single word : freedom . until we live in a society where every human be assure dignity in their labor so that they can work to live well , not only work to survive , there will always be an element of those who seek the open road as a means of escape , of liberation and , of course , of rebellion .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   election night 2008 be a night that tear I in half . it be the night that barack obama be elect . [ one hundred and forty - three ]   year after the end of slavery , and [ 43 ] year after the passage of the voting rights act , an african - american be elect president . many of we never think that this be possible until the moment that it happen . and in many way , it be the climax of the black civil right movement in the united states .     I be in california that night , which be ground zero at the time for another movement : the marriage equality movement . gay marriage be on the ballot in the form of proposition 8 , and as the election return start to come in , it become clear that the right for same sex couple to marry , which have recently be grant by the california court , be go to be take away . so on the same night that barack obama win his historic presidency , the lesbian and gay community suffer one of our most painful defeat .     and then it get even bad . pretty much immediately , african - americans start to be blame for the passage of proposition 8 . this be largely due to an incorrect poll that say that black have vote for the measure by something like 70 percent . this turn out not to be true , but this idea of pervasive black homophobia set in , and be grab on by the medium . I could not tear myself away from the coverage . I listen to some gay commentator say that the african - american community be notoriously homophobic , and now that civil right have be achieve for we , we want to take away other people 's right . there be even report of racist epithet be throw at some of the participant of the gay right rally that take place after the election . and on the other side , some african - americans dismiss or ignore homophobia that be indeed real in our community . and other resent this comparison between gay right and civil right , and once again , the sink feeling that two minority group of which I be both a part of be compete with each other instead of support each other overwhelmed and , frankly , piss I off .     now , I be a documentary filmmaker , so after go through my piss off stage and yell at the television and radio , my next instinct be to make a movie . and what guide I in make this film be , how be this happen ? how be it that the gay right movement be be pit against the civil right movement ? and this be not just an abstract question . I be a beneficiary of both movement , so this be actually personal . but then something else happen after that election in 2008 . the march towards gay equality accelerate at a pace that surprise and shock everyone , and be still reshape our law and our policy , our institution and our entire country . and so it start to become increasingly clear to I that this pitting of the two movement against each other actually do not make sense , and that they be in fact much , much more interconnect , and that , in fact , some of the way that the gay right movement have be able to make such incredible gain so quickly be that it be use some of the same tactic and strategy that be first lay down by the civil right movement . let us just look at a few of these strategy .     first off , it be really interesting to see , to actually visually see , how quick the gay right movement have make its gain , if you look at a few of the major event on a timeline of both freedom movement . now , there be ton of milestone in the civil right movement , but the first one we be go to start with be the 1955 montgomery bus boycott . this be a protest campaign against montgomery , alabama 's segregation on their public transit system , and it begin when a woman name rosa park refuse to give up her seat to a white person . the campaign last a year , and it galvanize the civil right movement like nothing have before it . and I call this strategy the " I be tired of your foot on my neck " strategy .     so gay and lesbian have be in society since society begin , but up until the mid-20th century , homosexual act be still illegal in most state . so just 14 year after the montgomery bus boycott , a group of lgbt folk take that same strategy . it be know as stonewall , in 1969 , and it be where a group of lgbt patron fight back against police beating at a greenwich village bar that spark three day of rioting . incidentally , black and latino lgbt folk be at the forefront of this rebellion , and it be a really interesting example of the intersection of our struggle against racism , homophobia , gender identity and police brutality . after stonewall happen , gay liberation group spring up all over the country , and the modern gay right   movement as we know it take off .     so the next moment to look at on the timeline be the 1963 march on washington . this be a seminal event in the civil right movement and it be where african - americans call for both civil and economic justice . and it be of course where martin luther king deliver his famous " I have a dream " speech , but what be actually less know be that this march be organize by a man name bayard rustin . bayard be an out gay man , and he be consider one of the most brilliant strategist of the civil right movement . he later in his life become a fierce advocate of lgbt right as well , and his life be testament to the intersection of the struggle . the march on washington be one of the high point of the movement , and it be where there be a fervent belief that african - americans too could be a part of american democracy . I call this strategy the " we be visible and many in number " strategy .     some early gay activist be actually directly inspire by the march , and some have take part . gay pioneer jack nichols say , " we march with martin luther king , seven of we from the mattachine society " — which be an early gay right organization — " and from that moment on , we have our own dream about a gay right march of similar proportion . " several year later , a series of marche take place , each one gain the momentum of the gay freedom struggle . the first one be in 1979 , and the second one take place in 1987 . the third one be hold in 1993 . almost a million people show up , and people be so energized and excite by what have take place , they go back to their own community and start their own political and social organization , far increase the visibility of the movement . the day of that march , october 11 , be then declare national come out day , and be still celebrate all over the world . these marche set the groundwork for the historic change that we see happen today in the united states .     and lastly , the " love " strategy . the name speak for itself . in 1967 , the supreme court rule in love v. virginia , and invalidate all law that prohibit interracial marriage . this be consider one of the supreme court 's landmark civil right case . in 1996 , president clinton sign the defense of marriage act , know as doma , and that make the federal government only have to recognize marriage between a man and a woman . in united states v. windsor , a 79 - year - old lesbian name edith windsor sue the federal government when she be force to pay estate taxis on her deceased wife 's property , something that heterosexual   couple do not have to do . and as the case wind its way through the low court , the love case be repeatedly cite as precedent . when it get to the supreme court in 2013 , the supreme court agree , and doma be throw out . it be incredible . but the gay marriage movement have be make gain for year now . to date , 17 state have pass law allow marriage equality . it be become the de facto battle for gay equality , and it seem like daily , law prohibit it be be challenge in the court , even in place like texas and utah , which no one see come .     so a lot have change since that night in 2008 when I feel tear in half . I do go on to make that film . it be a documentary film , and it be call " the new black , " and it look at how the african - american community be grapple with the gay right issue in light of the gay marriage movement and this fight over the meaning of civil right . and I want to capture some of this incredible change that be happen , and as luck or politic would have it , another marriage battle start gear up , this time in maryland , where african - americans make up 30 percent of the electorate . so this tension between gay right and civil right start to bubble up once again , and I be lucky enough to capture how some people be make the connection between the movement this time . this be a clip of karess taylor - hughes and samantha master , two character in the film , as they hit the street of baltimore and try to convince potential voter .     ( video ) samantha master : that be what be up , man , this be a righteous man over here . okay , be you register to vote ?     man : no . karess taylor - hughe : okay . how old be you ?     man : 21 . kth : 21 ? you got to get register to vote .     we get to get you register to vote .     man : I be not vote on no gay shit .     sm : okay , why ? what be up ? man : I be not with that .     sm : that be not cool .     man : what make you be gay ? sm : so what make you be straight ?     so what make you be straight ? man 2 : you can not answer that question . ( laughter )     ksm : I use to not have the same right as you , but I know that because a black man like yourself stand up for a woman like I , I know that I 've get the same opportunity . so you , as a black man , have the opportunity to stand up for somebody else . whether you be gay or not , these be your brother and sister out here , and they need you to represent .     man 2 : who be you to tell somebody who they can not have sex with , who they can not be with ? they be not get that power . nobody have that power to say , you can not marry that young lady . who have that power ? nobody .     sm : but you know what ? our state have put the power in your hand , and so what we need you to do be vote for , you going to vote for 6 .     man 2 : I get you .     sm : vote for 6 , okay ? man 2 : I get you .     ksm : all right , do you all need community service hour ? you do ? all right , you can always volunteer with we to get community service hour . you all want to do that ? we feed you . we bring you pizza .     ( laughter ) ( applause )     yoruba richen : thank you . what be amazing to I about that clip that we just capture as we be film be , it really show how karess understand the history of the civil right movement , but she be not restrict by it . she do not just limit it to black people . she see it as a blueprint for expand right to gay and lesbian . maybe because she be young , she be like 25 , she be able to do this a little bit more easily , but the fact be that maryland voter do pass that marriage equality amendment , and in fact it be the first time that marriage equality be directly vote on and pass by the voter . african - americans support it at a high level than have ever be record . it be a complete turnaround from that night in 2008 when proposition 8 be pass . it be , and feel , monumental . we in the lgbt community have go from be a pathologized and revile and criminalize group to be see as part of the great human quest for dignity and equality . we 've go from have to hide our sexuality in order to maintain our job and our family to literally get a place at the table with the president and a shout out at his second inauguration . I just want to read what he say at that inauguration : " we the people declare today that the most evident of truth , that all of we be create equal . it be the star that guide we still , just as it guide our forebear through seneca fall and selma and stonewall . "     now we know that everything be not perfect , especially when you look at what be happen with the lgbt rights issue internationally , but it say something about how far we 've come when our president put the gay freedom struggle in the context of the other great freedom struggle of our time : the woman 's right movement and the civil right movement . his statement demonstrate not only the interconnectedness of those movement , but how each one borrow and be inspire by the other . so just as martin luther king learn from and borrow from gandhi 's tactic of civil disobedience and nonviolence , which become a bedrock of the civil right movement , the gay right movement see what work in the civil right movement , and they use some of those same strategy and tactic to make gain at an even quick pace .     maybe one more other reason for the relative quick progress of the gay right movement . whereas a lot of we continue to still live in racially segregated space , lgbt folk , we be everywhere . we be in urban community and rural community , community of color , immigrant community , church and mosque and synagogue . we be your mother and brother and sister and son . and when someone that you love or a family member come out , it may be easy to support their quest for equality . and in fact , the gay right movement ask we to support justice and equality from a space of love . that may be the big , great gift that the movement have give we . it call on we to access that which be most universal and most intimate : a love of our brother and our sister and our neighbor . I just want to end with a quote by one of our great freedom fighter who be no long with we , nelson mandela of south africa . nelson mandela lead south africa after the dark and brutal day of apartheid , and out of the ashe of that   legalize racial discrimination , he lead south africa to become the first country in the world to ban discrimination base on sexual orientation within its constitution . mandela say , " for to be free be not merely to cast off one 's chain , but to live in a way that respect and enhance the freedom of other . "     so as these movement continue on , and as freedom struggle around the world continue on , let us remember that not only be they interconnect , but they must support and enhance each other for we to be truly victorious .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   four year ago , a security researcher , or , as most people would call it , a hacker , find a way to literally make atms throw money at he . his name be barnaby jack , and this technique be later call " jackpotting " in his honor .     I be here today because I think we actually need hacker . barnaby jack could have easily turn into a career criminal or james bond villain with his knowledge , but he choose to show the world his research instead . he believe that sometimes you have to demo a threat to spark a solution . and I feel the same way . that be why I be here today .     we be often terrified and fascinate by the power hacker now have . they scare we . but the choice they make have dramatic outcome that influence we all . so I be here today because I think we need hacker , and in fact , they just might be the immune system for the information age . sometimes they make we sick , but they also find those hide threat in our world , and they make we fix it .     I know that I might get hack for give this talk , so let I save you the effort . in true ted fashion , here be my most embarrassing picture . but it would be difficult for you to find I in it , because I be the one who look like a boy stand to the side . I be such a nerd back then that even the boy on the dungeon and dragon team would not let I join . this be who I be , but this be who I want to be : angelina jolie . she portray acid burn in the ' 95 film " hacker . " she be pretty and she could rollerblade , but be a hacker , that make she powerful . and I want to be just like she , so I start spend a lot of time on hacker chat room and online forum . I remember one late night I find a bit of php code . I do not really know what it do , but I copy - paste it and use it anyway to get into a password - protect site like that . open sesame . it be a simple trick , and I be just a script kiddie back then , but to I , that trick , it feel like this , like I have discover limitless potential at my fingertip . this be the rush of power that hacker feel . it be geek just like I discover they have access to superpower , one that require the skill and tenacity of their intellect , but thankfully no radioactive spider .     but with great power come great responsibility , and you all like to think that if we have such power , we would only use they for good . but what if you could read your ex 's email , or add a couple zero to your bank account . what would you do then ? indeed , many hacker do not resist those temptation , and so they be responsible in one way or another to billion of dollar lose each year to fraud , malware or plain old identity theft , which be a serious issue . but there be other hacker , hacker who just like to break thing , and it be precisely those hacker that can find the weak element in our world and make we fix it .     this be what happen last year when another security researcher call kyle lovett discover a gape hole in the design of certain wireless router like you might have in your home or office . he learn that anyone could remotely connect to these device over the internet and download document from hard drive attach to those router , no password need . he report it to the company , of course , but they ignore his report . perhaps they think universal access be a feature , not a bug , until two month ago when a group of hacker use it to get into people 's file . but they do not steal anything . they leave a note : your router and your document can be access by anyone in the world . here be what you should do to fix it . we hope we help . by get into people 's file like that , yeah , they break the law , but they also force that company to fix their product .     make vulnerability know to the public be a practice call full disclosure in the hacker community , and it be controversial , but it do make I think of how hacker have an evolve effect on technology we use every day . this be what khalil do . khalil be a palestinian hacker from the west bank , and he find a serious privacy flaw on facebook which he attempt to report through the company 's bug bounty program . these be usually great arrangement for company to reward hacker disclose vulnerability they find in their code . unfortunately , due to some miscommunication , his report be not acknowledge . frustrate with the exchange , he take to use his own discovery to post on mark zuckerberg 's wall . this get their attention , all right , and they fix the bug , but because he have not report it properly , he be deny the bounty usually pay out for such discovery . thankfully for khalil , a group of hacker be watch out for he . in fact , they raise more than 13,000 dollar to reward he for this discovery , raise a vital discussion in the technology industry about how we come up with incentive for hacker to do the right thing . but I think there be a great story here still . even company found by hacker , like facebook be , still have a complicated relationship when it come to hacker . and so for more conservative organization , it be go to take time and adapt in order to embrace hacker culture and the creative chaos that it bring with it . but I think it be worth the effort , because the alternative , to blindly fight all hacker , be to go against the power you can not control at the cost of stifle innovation and regulate knowledge . these be thing that will come back and bite you .     it be even more true if we go after hacker that be willing to risk their own freedom for ideal like the freedom of the web , especially in time like this , like today even , as government and corporate fight to control the internet . I find it astounding that someone from the shadowy corner of cyberspace can become its voice of opposition , its last line of defense even , perhaps someone like anonymous , the lead brand of global hacktivism . this universal hacker movement need no introduction today , but six year ago they be not much more than an internet subculture dedicate to share silly picture of funny cat and internet trolling campaign . their moment of transformation be in early 2008 when the church of scientology attempt to remove certain leak video from appear on certain website . this be when anonymous be forge out of the seemingly random collection of internet dweller . it turn out , the internet do not like it when you try to remove thing from it , and it will react with cyberattack and elaborate prank and with a series of organize protest all around the world , from my hometown of tel aviv to adelaide , australia . this prove that anonymous and this idea can rally the masse from the keyboard to the street , and it lay the foundation for dozen of future operation against perceive injustice to their online and offline world . since then , they 've go after many target . they 've uncover corruption , abuse . they 've hack pope and politician , and I think their effect be large than simple denial of service attack that take down website or even leak sensitive document . I think that , like robin hood , they be in the business of redistribution , but what they be after be not your money . it be not your document . it be your attention . they grab the spotlight for cause they support , force we to take note , act as a global magnify glass for issue that we be not as aware of but perhaps we should be . they have be call many name from criminal to terrorist , and I can not justify their illegal mean , but the idea they fight for be one that matter to we all . the reality be , hacker can do a lot more than break thing . they can bring people together .     and if the internet do not like it when you try to remove thing from it , just watch what happen when you try to shut the internet down . this take place in egypt in january 2011 , and as president hosni mubarak attempt a desperate move to quash the rise revolution on the street of cairo , he send his personal troop down to egypt 's internet service provider and have they physically kill the switch on the country 's connection to the world overnight . for a government to do a thing like that be unprecedented , and for hacker , it make it personal . hacker like the telecomix group be already active on the ground , help egyptian bypass censorship use clever workaround like morse code and ham radio . it be high season for low tech , which the government could not block , but when the net go completely down , telecomix bring in the big gun . they find european service provider that still have 20 - year - old analog dial - up access infrastructure . they open up 300 of those line for egyptian to use , serve slow but sweet internet connection for egyptian . this work . it work so well , in fact , one guy even use it to download an episode of " how I meet your mother . " but while egypt 's future be still uncertain , when the same thing happen in syria just one year later , telecomix be prepare with those internet line , and anonymous , they be perhaps the first international group to officially denounce the action of the syrian military by deface their website .     but with this sort of power , it really depend on where you stand , because one man 's hero can be another 's villain , and so the syrian electronic army be a pro - assad group of hacker who support his contentious regime . they 've take down multiple high - profile target in the past few year , include the associated press 's twitter account , in which they post a message about an attack on the white house injure president obama . this tweet be fake , of course , but the result drop in the dow jones index that day be most certainly not , and a lot of people lose a lot of money .     this sort of thing be happen all over the world right now . in conflict from the crimean peninsula to latin america , from europe to the united states , hacker be a force for social , political and military influence . as individual or in group , volunteer or military conflict , there be hacker everywhere . they come from all walk of life , ethnicity , ideology and gender , I might add . they be now shape the world 's stage . hacker represent an exceptional force for change in the 21st century . this be because access to information be a critical currency of power , one which government would like to control , a thing they attempt to do by set up all - you - can - eat surveillance program , a thing they need hacker for , by the way . and so the establishment have long have a love - hate relationship when it come to hacker , because the same people who demonize hacking also utilize it at large .     two year ago , I see general keith alexander . he be the nsa director and u.s . cyber commander , but instead of his four star general uniform , he be wear jean and a t - shirt . this be at def con , the world 's large hacker conference . perhaps like I , general alexander do not see 12,000 criminal that day in vegas . I think he see untapped potential . in fact , he be there to give a hire pitch . " in this room right here , " he say , " be the talent our nation need . " well , hacker in the back row reply , " then stop arrest we . " ( applause )     indeed , for year , hacker have be on the wrong side of the fence , but in light of what we know now , who be more watchful of our online world ? the rule of the game be not that clear anymore , but hacker be perhaps the only one still capable of challenge overreach government and data - hoarding corporate on their own playing field . to I , that represent hope .     for the past three decade , hacker have do a lot of thing , but they have also impact civil liberty , innovation and internet freedom , so I think it be time we take a good look at how we choose to portray they , because if we keep expect they to be the bad guy , how can they be the hero too ? my year in the hacker world have make I realize both the problem and the beauty about hacker : they just can not see something break in the world and leave it be . they be compel to either exploit it or try and change it , and so they find the vulnerable aspect in our rapidly change world . they make we , they force we to fix thing or demand something well , and I think we need they to do just that , because after all , it be not information that want to be free , it be we .     thank you very much .     thank you . ( applause )     hack the planet !  
   as a scientist , and also as a human being , I 've be try to make myself susceptible to wonder . I think jason webley last night call it " conspire to be part of the magic . " so it be fortunate that my career as a biologist let I dive deeply into the life of some truly wondrous creature that share our planet : firefly .     now , for many of you , I know that firefly might conjure up some really great memory : childhood , summertime , even other ted talk . maybe something like this .     my seduction into the world of firefly begin when I be back in graduate school . one evening , I be sit out in my backyard in north carolina , and suddenly , these silent spark rise up all around I , and I begin to wonder : how do these creature make light , and what be with all this flash ? be they talk to one another ? and what happen after the light go out ? I 've be lucky enough to answer some of these question as I 've explore this nocturnal world .     now if you 've ever see or even hear about firefly , then you 'll know how magically they can transform our everyday landscape into something ethereal and otherworldly , and this happen around the globe , like this hillside in the smoky mountain that I see transform into a living cascade of light by the eerie glow of these blue ghost firefly , or a roadside river that I visit in japan as it be give birth to the slow , float flash of these genji firefly , or in malaysia , the mangrove tree that I watch blossom nightly not with flower but with the light of a thousand —   ( bleep ! bleep ! ) — firefly , all blink together in stunning synchrony . these luminous landscape still fill I with wonder , and they keep I connected to the magic of the natural world .     and I find it amazing that they be create by these tiny insect . in person , firefly be charming . they be charismatic . they 've be celebrate in art and in poetry for century . as I 've travel around the world , I 've meet many thoughtful people who have tell I that god put firefly on earth for human to enjoy . other creature can enjoy they too . I think these graceful insect be truly miraculous because they so beautifully illuminate the creative improvisation of evolution . they 've be shape by two powerful evolutionary force : natural selection , the struggle for survival , and sexual selection , the struggle for reproductive opportunity . as a firefly junkie , the past 20 year have be quite an exciting ride . together with my student at tuft university and other colleague , we 've make lot of new discovery about firefly : their courtship and sex life , their treachery and murder . so today I would like to share with you just a couple of tale that we 've bring back from our collective adventure into this hidden world .     firefly belong to a very beautiful and diverse group of insect , the beetle . worldwide , there be more than 2,000 firefly specie , and these have evolve remarkably diverse courtship signal , that is , different way to find and attract mate . around 150 million year ago , the very first firefly probably look like this . they fly during the daytime and they do not light up . instead , male use their fantastic antennae to sniff out perfume give off by their female . in other firefly , it be only the female who light up . they be attractively plump and wingless , so every night , they climb up onto perch and they glow brightly for hour to attract their fly but unlit male . in still other firefly , both sex use quick , bright flash to find their mate . here in north america , we have more than 100 different kind of firefly that have the remarkable ability to shine energy out from their body in the form of light . how do they do that ? it seem totally magical , but these bioluminescent signal arise from carefully orchestrate chemical reaction that happen inside the firefly lantern . the main star be an enzyme call luciferase , which in the course of evolution have figure out a way to wrap its tiny arm around an even small molecule call luciferin , in the process get it so excited that it actually give off light . incredible .     but how could these bright light have benefit some proto - firefly ? to answer this question , we need to flip back in the family album to some baby picture . firefly completely reinvent their body as they grow . they spend the vast majority of their lifetime , up to two year , in this larval form . their main goal here , like my teenager , be to eat and grow . and firefly light first originate in these juvenile . every single firefly larva can light up , even when their adult can not .     but what be the point to be so conspicuous ? well , we know that these juvenile make nasty - taste chemical that help they survive their extended childhood , so we think these light first evolve as a warning , a neon sign that say , " toxic ! stay away ! " to any would - be predator . it take many million of year before these bright light evolve into a smart communication tool that could be use not just to ward off potential predator but to bring in potential mate . drive now by sexual selection , some adult firefly like this proud male evolve a shiny new glow - in - the - dark lantern that would let they take courtship to a whole new level . these adult only live a few week , and now they be single - mindedly focus on sex , that is , on propel their gene into the next firefly generation . so we can follow this male out into the field as he join hundred of other male who be all show off their new courtship signal . it be amazing to think that the luminous display we admire here and in fact everywhere around the world be actually the silent love song of male firefly . they be fly and flash their heart out . I still find it very romantic .     but meanwhile , where be all the female ? well , they be lounge down below survey their option . they have plenty of male to choose from , and these female turn out to be very picky . when a female see a flash from an especially attractive male , she 'll aim her lantern in his direction , and give he a flash back . it be she " come hither " sign . so he fly close and he flash again . if she still like he , they 'll strike up a conversation . these creature speak their love in the language of light .     so what exactly do these female consider sexy ? we decide to conduct some firefly opinion poll to find out . when we test female use blink lead light , we discover they prefer male who give long - last flash . ( laughter ) ( applause ) I know you be wonder , what give these male their sex appeal ? now we get to see what happen when the light go out .     the first thing we discover be that once a male and female hook up like this , they stay together all night long , and when we look inside to see what might be happen , we discover a surprising new twist to firefly sex . while they be mate , the male be busy give the female not just his sperm but also a nutrient - fill package call a nuptial gift . we can zoom in to look more closely inside this mating pair . we can actually see the gift — it be show here in red — as it be be pass from the male to the female . what make this gift so valuable be that it be pack with protein that the female will use to provision her egg . so female be keep their eye on this prize as they size up potential mate . we discover that female use male flash signal to try to predict which male have the big gift to offer , because this bling help the female lay more egg and ultimately launch more of her own offspring into the next generation .     so it be not all sweetness and light . firefly romance be risky . for the most part , these adult firefly do not get eat because like their juvenile they can manufacture toxin that be repellent to bird and other insectivore , but somewhere along the line , one particular group of firefly somehow lose the metabolic machinery need to make their own protective toxin . this evolutionary flaw , which be discover by my colleague tom eisner , have drive these firefly to take their bright light out into the night with treacherous intent . dub " femme fatale " by jim lloyd , another colleague , these female have figure out how to target the male of other firefly specie . so the hunt begin with the predator — she be show here in the low left — where she be sit quietly and eavesdrop on the courtship conversation of her intended prey , and here be how it might go . first the prey male flash , " do you love I ? " his own female respond , " maybe . " so then he flash again . but this time , the predator sneak in a reply that cleverly mimic exactly what the other female just say . she be not look for love : she be look for toxin . if she be good , she can lure this male close enough to reach out and grab he , and he be not just a light snack . over the next hour , she slowly exsanguinate this male leave behind just some gory remain . unable to make their own toxin , these female resort to drink the blood of other firefly to get these protective chemical . so a firefly vampire , bring to you by natural selection .     we still have a lot to learn about firefly , but it look like many story will remain untold , because around the world , firefly population be blink out . the main culprit : habitat loss . pretty much everywhere , the field and forest , the mangrove and meadow that firefly need to survive , be give way to development and to sprawl .     here be another problem : we 've conquer darkness , but in the process , we spill so much extra light out into the night that it disrupt the life of other creature , and firefly be especially sensitive to light pollution because it obscure the signal that they use to find their mate .     do we really need firefly ? after all , they be just one tiny bit of earth 's biodiversity . yet every time a species be lose , it be like extinguish a room full of candle one by one . you might not notice when the first few flame flicker out , but in the end , you be leave sit in darkness . as we work together to craft a planetary future , I hope we can find a way to keep these bright light shine .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   what do you think of when I say the word " design " ? you probably think of thing like this , finely craft object that you can hold in your hand , or maybe logo and poster and map that visually explain thing , classic icon of timeless design . but I be not here to talk about that kind of design . I want to talk about the kind that you probably use every day and may not give much thought to , design that change all the time and that live inside your pocket . I be talk about the design of digital experience and specifically the design of system that be so big that their scale can be hard to comprehend . consider the fact that google process over one billion search query every day , that every minute , over 100 hour of footage be upload to youtube . that be more in a single day than all three major u.s . network broadcast in the last five year combine . and facebook transmit the photo , message and story of over 1.23 billion people . that be almost half of the internet population , and a sixth of humanity .     these be some of the product that I 've help design over the course of my career , and their scale be so massive that they 've produce unprecedented design challenge . but what be really hard about design at scale be this : it be hard in part because it require a combination of two thing , audacity and humility — audacity to believe that the thing that you be make be something that the entire world want and need , and humility to understand that as a designer , it be not about you or your portfolio , it be about the people that you be design for , and how your work just might help they live well life . now , unfortunately , there be no school that offer the course design for humanity 101 . I and the other designer who work on these kind of product have have to invent it as we go along , and we be teach ourselves the emerge good practice of design at scale , and today I would like share some of the thing that we 've learn over the year .     now , the first thing that you need to know about design at scale be that the little thing really matter . here be a really good example of how a very tiny design element can make a big impact . the team at facebook that manage the facebook " like " button decide that it need to be redesign . the button have kind of get out of sync with the evolution of our brand and it need to be modernize . now you might think , well , it be a tiny little button , it probably be a pretty straightforward , easy design assignment , but it be not . turn out , there be all kind of constraint for the design of this button . you have to work within specific height and width parameter . you have to be careful to make it work in a bunch of different language , and be careful about use fancy gradient or border because it have to degrade gracefully in old web browser . the truth be , design this tiny little button be a huge pain in the butt .     now , this be the new version of the button , and the designer who lead this project estimate that he spend over 280 hour redesign this button over the course of month . now , why would we spend so much time on something so small ? it be because when you be design at scale , there be no such thing as a small detail . this innocent little button be see on average 22 billion time a day and on over 7.5 million website . it be one of the single most view design element ever create . now that be a lot of pressure for a little button and the designer behind it , but with these kind of product , you need to get even the tiny thing right .     now , the next thing that you need to understand be how to design with datum . now , when you be work on product like this , you have incredible amount of information about how people be use your product that you can then use to influence your design decision , but it be not just as simple as follow the number . let I give you an example so that you can understand what I mean . facebook have have a tool for a long time that allow people to report photo that may be in violation of our community standard , thing like spam and abuse . and there be a ton of photo report , but as it turn out , only a small percentage be actually in violation of those community standard . most of they be just your typical party photo . now , to give you a specific hypothetical example , let us say my friend laura hypothetically upload a picture of I from a drunken night of karaoke . this be purely hypothetical , I can assure you . ( laughter ) now , incidentally , you know how some people be kind of worried that their boss or employee be go to discover embarrassing photo of they on facebook ? do you know how hard that be to avoid when you actually work at facebook ? so anyway , there be lot of these photo be erroneously report as spam and abuse , and one of the engineer on the team have a hunch . he really think there be something else go on and he be right , because when he look through a bunch of the case , he find that most of they be from people who be request the takedown of a photo of themselves . now this be a scenario that the team never even take into account before . so they add a new feature that allow people to message their friend to ask they to take the photo down . but it do not work . only 20 percent of people send the message to their friend . so the team go back at it . they consult with expert in conflict resolution . they even study the universal principle of polite language , which I do not even actually know exist until this research happen . and they find something really interesting . they have to go beyond just help people ask their friend to take the photo down . they have to help people express to their friend how the photo make they feel .     here be how the experience work today . so I find this hypothetical photo of myself , and it be not spam , it be not abuse , but I really wish it be not on the site . so I report it and I say , " I be in this photo and I do not like it , " and then we dig deeply . why do not you like this photo of yourself ? and I select " it be embarrassing . " and then I be encourage to message my friend , but here be the critical difference . I be provide specific suggested language that help I communicate to laura how the photo make I feel . now the team find that this relatively small change have a huge impact . before , only 20 percent of people be send the message , and now 60 percent be , and survey show that people on both side of the conversation feel well as a result . that same survey show that 90 percent of your friend want to know if they 've do something to upset you . now I do not know who the other 10 percent be , but maybe that be where our " unfriend " feature can come in handy .     so as you can see , these decision be highly nuanced . of course we use a lot of datum to inform our decision , but we also rely very heavily on iteration , research , testing , intuition , human empathy . it be both art and science . now , sometimes the designer who work on these product be call " data - drive , " which be a term that totally drive we bonker . the fact be , it would be irresponsible of we not to rigorously test our design when so many people be count on we to get it right , but datum analytic will never be a substitute for design intuition . datum can help you make a good design great , but it will never make a bad design good .     the next thing that you need to understand as a principle be that when you introduce change , you need to do it extraordinarily carefully . now I often have joke that I spend almost as much time design the introduction of change as I do the change itself , and I be sure that we can all relate to that when something that we use a lot change and then we have to adjust . the fact be , people can become very efficient at use bad design , and so even if the change be good for they in the long run , it be still incredibly frustrating when it happen , and this be particularly true with user - generate content platform , because people can rightfully claim a sense of ownership . it be , after all , their content .     now , year ago , when I be work at youtube , we be look for way to encourage more people to rate video , and it be interesting because when we look into the datum , we find that almost everyone be exclusively use the high five - star rating , a handful of people be use the low one - star , and virtually no one be use two , three or four star . so we decide to simplify into an up - down kind of vote binary model . it be go to be much easy for people to engage with . but people be very attached to the five - star rating system . video creator really love their rating . million and million of people be accustomed to the old design . so in order to help people prepare themselves for change and acclimate to the new design more quickly , we actually publish the data graph share with the community the rationale for what we be go to do , and it even engage the large industry in a conversation , which result in my favorite techcrunch headline of all time : " youtube come to a 5 - star realization : its rating be useless . "     now , it be impossible to completely avoid change aversion when you be make change to product that so many people use . even though we try to do all the right thing , we still receive our customary flood of video protest and angry email and even a package that have to be scan by security , but we have to remember people care intensely about this stuff , and it be because these product , this work , really , really matter to they .     now , we know that we have to be careful about pay attention to the detail , we have to be cognizant about how we use datum in our design process , and we have to introduce change very , very carefully . now , these thing be all really useful . they be good good practice for design at scale . but they do not mean anything if you do not understand something much more fundamental . you have to understand who you be design for .     now , when you set a goal to design for the entire human race , and you start to engage in that goal in earnest , at some point you run into the wall of the bubble that you be live in . now , in san francisco , we get a little miffed when we hit a dead cell zone because we can not use our phone to navigate to the new hipst coffee shop . but what if you have to drive four hour to charge your phone because you have no reliable source of electricity ? what if you have no access to public library ? what if your country have no free press ? what would these product start to mean to you ? this be what google , youtube and facebook look like to most of the world , and it be what they 'll look like to most of the next five billion people to come online . design for low - end cell phone be not glamorous design work , but if you want to design for the whole world , you have to design for where people be , and not where you be .     so how do we keep this big , big picture in mind ? we try to travel outside of our bubble to see , hear and understand the people we be design for . we use our product in non - english language to make sure that they work just as well . and we try to use one of these phone from time to time to keep in touch with their reality .     so what do it mean to design at a global scale ? it mean difficult and sometimes exasperate work to try to improve and evolve product . find the audacity and the humility to do right by they can be pretty exhausting , and the humility part , it be a little tough on the design ego . because these product be always change , everything that I 've design in my career be pretty much go , and everything that I will design will fade away . but here be what remain : the never - end thrill of be a part of something that be so big , you can hardly get your head around it , and the promise that it just might change the world .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   take a look at this drawing . can you tell what it be ? I be a molecular biologist by training , and I 've see a lot of these kind of drawing . they be usually refer to as a model figure , a drawing that show how we think a cellular or molecular process occur . this particular drawing be of a process call clathrin - mediate endocytosis . it be a process by which a molecule can get from the outside of the cell to the inside by getting capture in a bubble or a vesicle that then gets internalize by the cell . there be a problem with this drawing , though , and it be mainly in what it do not show . from lot of experiment , from lot of different scientist , we know a lot about what these molecule look like , how they move around in the cell , and that this be all take place in an incredibly dynamic environment .     so in collaboration with a clathrin expert tomas kirchhausen , we decide to create a new kind of model figure that show all of that . so we start outside of the cell . now we be look inside . clathrin be these three - legged molecule that can self - assemble into soccer - ball - like shape . through connection with a membrane , clathrin be able to deform the membrane and form this sort of a cup that form this sort of a bubble , or a vesicle , that be now capture some of the protein that be outside of the cell . protein be come in now that basically pinch off this vesicle , make it separate from the rest of the membrane , and now clathrin be basically do with its job , and so protein be come in now — we 've cover they yellow and orange — that be responsible for take apart this clathrin cage . and so all of these protein can get basically recycle and use all over again .     these process be too small to be see directly , even with the good microscope , so animation like this provide a really powerful way of visualize a hypothesis .     here be another illustration , and this be a drawing of how a researcher might think that the hiv virus get into and out of cell . and again , this be a vast oversimplification and do not begin to show what we actually know about these process .     you might be surprised to know that these simple drawing be the only way that most biologist visualize their molecular hypothesis . why ? because create movie of process as we think they actually occur be really hard . I spend month in hollywood learn 3d animation software , and I spend month on each animation , and that be just time that most researcher can not afford . the payoff can be huge , though . molecular animation be unparalleled in their ability to convey a great deal of information to broad audience with extreme accuracy . and I be work on a new project now call " the science of hiv " where I 'll be animate the entire life cycle of the hiv virus as accurately as possible and all in molecular detail . the animation will feature datum from thousand of researcher collect over decade , datum on what this virus look like , how it be able to infect cell in our body , and how therapeutic be help to combat infection .     over the year , I find that animation be not just useful for communicate an idea , but they be also really useful for explore a hypothesis . biologist for the most part be still use a paper and pencil to visualize the process they study , and with the datum we have now , that be just not good enough anymore . the process of create an animation can act as a catalyst that allow researcher to crystalize and refine their own idea . one researcher I work with who work on the molecular mechanism of neurodegenerative disease come up with experiment that be relate directly to the animation that she and I work on together , and in this way , animation can feed back into the research process .     I believe that animation can change biology . it can change the way that we communicate with one another , how we explore our datum and how we teach our student . but for that change to happen , we need more researcher create animation , and toward that end , I bring together a team of biologist , animator and programmer to create a new , free , open - source software — we call it molecular flipbook — that be create just for biologist just to create molecular animation . from our testing , we 've find that it only take 15 minute for a biologist who have never touch animation software before to create her first molecular animation of her own hypothesis . we be also build an online database where anyone can view , download and contribute their own animation . we be really excited to announce that the beta version of the molecular animation software toolkit will be available for download today . we be really excited to see what biologist will create with it and what new insight they be able to gain from finally be able to animate their own model figure .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I would like to share with you today a project that have change how I approach and practice architecture : the fez river rehabilitation project .     my hometown of fez , morocco , boast one of the large walled medieval city in the world , call the medina , nestle in a river valley . the entire city be a unesco world heritage site . since the 1950 , as the population of the medina grow , basic urban infrastructure such as green open space and sewage quickly change and get highly stressed . one of the big casualty of the situation be the fez river , which bisect the medina in its middle and have be consider for many century as the city 's very soul . in fact , one can witness the presence of the river 's extensive water network all throughout the city , in place such as private and public fountain .     unfortunately , because of the pollution of the river , it have be cover little by little by concrete slab since 1952 . this process of erasure be couple with the destruction of many house along the river bank to be able to make machinery enter the narrow pedestrian network of the medina . those urban void quickly become illegal parking or trash yard . actually , the state of the river before enter the medina be pretty healthy . then pollution take its toll , mainly due to untreated sewage and chemical dumping from craft such as tan . at some point , I could not bear the desecration of the river , such an important part of my city , and I decide to take action , especially after I hear that the city receive a grant to divert sewage water and to treat it .     with clean water , suddenly the uncovering of the river become possible , and with luck and actually a lot of push , my partner takako tajima and I be commission by the city to work with a team of engineer to uncover the river . however , we be sneaky , and we propose more : to convert riverbank into pedestrian pathway , and then to connect these pathway back to the city fabric , and finally to convert the urban void along the riverbank into public space that be lack in the medina of fez . I will show you briefly now two of these public space .     the first one be the rcif plaza , which sit actually right on top of the river , which you can see here in dotted line . this plaza use to be a chaotic transportation hub that actually compromise the urban integrity of the medina , that have the large pedestrian network in the world . and right beyond the historic bridge that you can see here , right next to the plaza , you can see that the river look like a river of trash . instead , what we propose be to make the plaza entirely pedestrian , to cover it with recycled leather canopy , and to connect it to the bank of the river .     the second site of intervention be also an urban void along the river bank , and it use to be an illegal parking , and we propose to transform it into the first playground in the medina . the playground be construct use recycled tire and also be couple with a construct wetland that not only clean the water of the river but also retain it when flood occur .     as the project progress and receive several design award , new stakeholder intervene and change the project goal and design . the only way for we to be able to bring the main goal of the project ahead be for we to do something very unusual that usually architect do not do . it be for we to take our design ego and our sense of authorship and put it in the backseat and to focus mainly on be activist and on try to coalesce all of the agenda of stakeholder and focus on the main goal of the project : that be , to uncover the river , treat its water , and provide public space for all . we be actually very lucky , and many of those goal happen or be in the process of happen . like , you can see here in the rcif plaza . this be how it look like about six year ago . this be how it look like today . it be still under construction , but actually it be heavily use by the local population . and finally , this be how the rcif plaza will look like when the project be complete . this be the river , cover , use as a trash yard . then after many year of work , the river with clean water , uncover . and finally , you can see here the river when the project will be complete .     so for sure , the fez river rehabilitation will keep on change and adapt to the sociopolitical landscape of the city , but we strongly believe that by reimagine the role and the agency of the architect , we have set up the core idea of the project into motion ; that be , to transform the river from sewage to public space for all , thereby make sure that the city of fez will remain a live city for its inhabitant rather than a mummified heritage .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   hi , kid .     ( laughter )     I be 71 .     ( applause ) my husband be 76 . my parent be in their late 90 , and olivia , the dog , be 16 . so let us talk about age .     let I tell you how I feel when I see my wrinkle in the mirror and I realize that some part of I have drop and I can not find they down there . ( laughter )     mary oliver say in one of her poem , " tell I , what be it that you plan to do with your one wild and precious life ? " I , I intend to live passionately .     when do we start age ? society decide when we be old , usually around 65 , when we get medicare , but we really start age at birth . we be age right now , and we all experience it differently . we all feel young than our real age , because the spirit never age . I be still 17 . sophia loren . look at she . she say that everything you see she owe to spaghetti . I try it and gain 10 pound in the wrong place . but attitude , aging be also attitude and health . but my real mentor in this journey of aging be olga murray . this california girl at 60 start work in nepal to save young girl from domestic bondage . at 88 , she have save 12,000 girl , and she have change the culture in the country . ( applause ) now it be illegal for father to sell their daughter into servitude . she have also found orphanage and nutritional clinic . she be always happy and eternally young .     what have I lose in the last decade ? people , of course , place , and the boundless energy of my youth , and I be begin to lose independence , and that scare I . ram dass say that dependency hurt , but if you accept it , there be less suffering . after a very bad stroke , his ageless soul watch the change in the body with tenderness , and he be grateful to the people who help he .     what have I gain ? freedom : I do not have to prove anything anymore . I be not stick in the idea of who I be , who I want to be , or what other people expect I to be . I do not have to please man anymore , only animal . I keep tell my superego to back off and let I enjoy what I still have . my body may be fall apart , but my brain be not , yet . I love my brain . I feel light . I do not carry grudge , ambition , vanity , none of the deadly sin that be not even worth the trouble . it be great to let go . I should have start soon . and I also feel soft because I be not scared of be vulnerable . I do not see it as weakness anymore . and I 've gain spirituality . I be aware that before , death be in the neighborhood . now , it be next door , or in my house . I try to live mindfully and be present in the moment . by the way , the dalai lama be someone who have age beautifully , but who want to be vegetarian and celibate ? ( laughter )     meditation help .     ( video ) child : ommm . ommm . ommm .     isabel allende : ommm . ommm . there it be . and it be good to start early .     you know , for a vain female like myself , it be very hard to age in this culture . inside , I feel good , I feel charming , seductive , sexy . nobody else see that . ( laughter ) I be invisible . I want to be the center of attention . I hate to be invisible . ( laughter ) ( applause )     this be grace dammann . she have be in a wheelchair for six year after a terrible car accident . she say that there be nothing more sensual than a hot shower , that every drop of water be a blessing to the sense . she do not see herself as disabled . in her mind , she be still surf in the ocean . ethel seiderman , a feisty , beloved activist in the place where I live in california . she wear red patent shoe , and her mantra be that one scarf be nice but two be well . she have be a widow for nine year , but she be not look for another mate . she say that there be only a limited number of way you can screw — well , she say it in another way — and she have try they all . ( laughter ) I , on the other hand , I still have erotic fantasy with antonio bandera — ( laughter ) — and my poor husband have to put up with it .     so how can I stay passionate ? I can not will myself to be passionate at 71 . I have be train for some time , and when I feel flat and bored , I fake it . attitude , attitude . how do I train ? I train by say yes to whatever come my way : drama , comedy , tragedy , love , death , loss . yes to life . and I train by try to stay in love . it do not always work , but you can not blame I for try .     and , on a final note , retirement in spanish be jubilación . jubilation . celebration . we have pay our due . we have contribute to society . now it be our time , and it be a great time . unless you be ill or very poor , you have choice . I have choose to stay passionate , engage with an open heart . I be work on it every day . want to join I ?     thank you .     ( applause )     june cohen : so isabel — ia : thank you .     jc : first of all , I never like to presume to speak for the ted community , but I would like to tell you that I have a feeling we can all agree that you be still charming , seductive and sexy . yes ?     ia : aww , thank you . ( applause )     jc : hand down . ia : no , it be makeup .     moderator : now , would it be awkward if I ask you a follow - up question about your erotic fantasy ?     ia : oh , of course . about what ?     ( laughter )     moderator : about your erotic fantasy . ia : with antonio banderas .     moderator : I be just wonder if you have anything more to share .     ia : well , one of they be that — ( laughter ) one of they be that I place a naked antonio bandera on a mexican tortilla , I slather he with guacamole and salsa , I roll he up , and I eat he . ( laughter )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   good afternoon . my name be uldus . I be a photo - base artist from russia . I start my way around six year ago with ironic self - portrait to lay open so many stereotype about nationality , gender , and social issue — [ " I be russian . I sell drug , gun , porno with kid ! " ] [ " vodka = water . I love vodka ! " ] ( laughter ) — use photography as my tool to send a message . [ " marry I , I need a visa . " ]     today , I be still perform in front of the camera and try to be brave like wonder woman . I focus on balance meaningful message , aesthetic , beauty , composition ,   some irony , and artifact .     today , I be go to tell you about my project , which be name desperate romantic . they be my artifact , or painting from pre - raphaelites brotherhood england mid-19th century . I take the painting and gift new , contemporary meaning talk about issue which be surround I in russia , capture people who be non - model but have an interesting story .     this boy be a professional dancer , only 12 year old , but at secondary school , he hide his dancing class and be wear the mask of brutality , try to be unite with the rest of his classmate like a storm trooper have no personality . but this boy have goal and dream but hide it to be socially accept , because be different be not easy , especially in russia .     next portrait interpretation be metaphoric . and this be nikita , a security guard from one of the bar in st . petersburg . he like to say , " you would not like I when I be angry , " quote hulk from the movie , but I 've never see he angry . he hide his sensitivity and romantic side , because in russia , among guy , that be not cool to be romantic , but it be cool to be surround with woman and look like an aggressive hulk . ( laughter )     sometimes , in my project , I would take the painting and give it new meaning and new temptation about it . sometimes , I would compare facial feature and play with word : irony , iron man , iron man . ( laughter )     through the artifact , I bring social issue which surround I in russia into the conversation . interesting fact about marriage in russia , that most of the 18 , 19 - year - old girl be already ready , and dream to get marry . we be teach from childhood , successful marriage mean successful life , so most of the girl kind of fight to get a good husband .     and what about I ? I be 27 year old . for russian society , I be an old maid and hopeless to ever get marry . that be why you see I in a mexican fighter mask , in the wedding dress , all desperate in my garden . but remember , irony be the key , and this be actually to motivate girl to fight for goal , for dream , and change stereotype . be brave . be ironic — it help . be funny and create some magic .     ( applause )  
   when I turn 19 , I start my career as the first female photojournalist in the gaza strip , palestine . my work as a woman photographer be consider a serious insult to local tradition , and create a last stigma for I and my family . the male - dominate field make my presence unwelcome you all possible mean . they make clear that a woman must not do a man 's job . photo agency in gaza refuse to train I because of my gender . the " no " sign be pretty clear .     three of my colleague go as far as to drive I to an open air strike area where the explosion sound be the only thing I could hear . dust be fly in the air , and the ground be shake like a swing beneath I . I only realize we be not there to document the event when the three of they get back into the armored jeep and drive away , wave and laugh , leave I behind in the open air strike zone .     for a moment , I feel terrified , humiliate , and sorry for myself . my colleague ' action be not the only death threat I have receive , but it be the most dangerous one .     the perception of woman 's life in gaza be passive . until a recent time , a lot of   woman be not allow to work or pursue education . at time of such double war include both social restriction on woman and the israeli - palestinian conflict , woman 's dark and bright story be fade away . to man , woman 's story be see as inconsequential .     I start pay close attention to woman 's life in gaza . because of my gender , I have access to world where my colleague be forbid . beyond the obvious pain and struggle , there be a healthy dose of laughter and accomplishment . in front of a police compound in gaza city during the first war in gaza , an israeli air raid manage to destroy the compound and break my nose . for a moment , all I see be white , bright white , like these light . I think to myself I either get blind or I be in heaven . by the time I manage to open my eye , I have document this moment .     mohammed khader , a palestinian worker who spend two decade in israel , as his retirement plan , he decide to build a four - floor house , only by the first field operation at his neighborhood , the house be flatten to the ground . nothing be leave but the pigeon he raise and a jacuzzi , a bathtub that he get from tel aviv . mohammed get the bathtub on the top of the rubble and start give his kid an every morning bubble bath .     my work be not mean to hide the scar of war , but to show the full frame of unseen story of gazan . as a palestinian female photographer , the journey of struggle , survival and everyday life have inspire I to overcome the community taboo and see a different side of war and its aftermath . I become a witness with a choice : to run away or stand still .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   today I want to tell you about a project be carry out by scientist all over the world to paint a neural portrait of the human mind . and the central idea of this work be that the human mind and brain be not a single , general - purpose processor , but a collection of highly specialized component , each solve a different specific problem , and yet collectively make up who we be as human being and thinker . to give you a feel for this idea ,     imagine the following scenario : you walk into your child 's day care center . as usual , there be a dozen kid there wait to get pick up , but this time , the child 's face look weirdly similar , and you can not figure out which child be yours . do you need new glass ? be you lose your mind ? you run through a quick mental checklist . no , you seem to be think clearly , and your vision be perfectly sharp . and everything look normal except the child 's face . you can see the face , but they do not look distinctive , and none of they look familiar , and it be only by spot an orange hair ribbon that you find your daughter .     this sudden loss of the ability to recognize face actually happen to people . it be call prosopagnosia , and it result from damage to a particular part of the brain . the striking thing about it be that only face recognition be impaired ; everything else be just fine .     prosopagnosia be one of many surprisingly specific mental deficit that can happen after brain damage . these syndrome collectively have suggest for a long time that the mind be divvy up into distinct component , but the effort to discover those component have jump to warp speed with the invention of brain imaging technology , especially mri . so mri enable you to see internal anatomy at high resolution , so I be go to show you in a second a set of mri cross - sectional image through a familiar object , and we be go to fly through they and you be go to try to figure out what the object be . here we go .     it be not that easy . it be an artichoke .     okay , let us try another one , start from the bottom and go through the top . broccoli ! it be a head of broccoli . be not it beautiful ? I love that .     okay , here be another one . it be a brain , of course . in fact , it be my brain . we be go through slice through my head like that . that be my nose over on the right , and now we be go over here , right there .     so this picture 's nice , if I do say so myself , but it show only anatomy . the really cool advance with functional imaging happen when scientist figure out how to make picture that show not just anatomy but activity , that is , where neuron be fire . so here be how this work . brain be like muscle . when they get active , they need increase blood flow to supply that activity , and lucky for we , blood flow control to the brain be local , so if a bunch of neuron , say , right there get active and start fire , then blood flow increase just right there . so functional mri pick up on that blood flow increase , produce a high mri response where neural activity go up .     so to give you a concrete feel for how a functional mri experiment go and what you can learn from it and what you can not , let I describe one of the first study I ever do . we want to know if there be a special part of the brain for recognize face , and there be already reason to think there might be such a thing base on this phenomenon of prosopagnosia that I describe a moment ago , but nobody have ever see that part of the brain in a normal person , so we set out to look for it . so I be the first subject . I go into the scanner , I lie on my back , I hold my head as still as I could while stare at picture of face like these and object like these and face and object for hour . so as somebody who have pretty close to the world record of total number of hour spend inside an mri scanner , I can tell you that one of the skill that be really important for mri research be bladder control . ( laughter )     when I get out of the scanner , I do a quick analysis of the datum , look for any part of my brain that produce a high response when I be look at face than when I be look at object , and here be what I see . now this image look just awful by today 's standard , but at the time I think it be beautiful . what it show be that region right there , that little blob , it be about the size of an olive and it be on the bottom surface of my brain about an inch straight in from right there . and what that part of my brain be do be produce a high mri response , that is , high neural activity , when I be look at face than when I be look at object . so that be pretty cool , but how do we know this be not a fluke ? well , the easy way be to just do the experiment again . so I get back in the scanner , I look at more face and I look at more object and I get a similar blob , and then I do it again and I do it again and again and again , and around about then I decide to believe it be for real . but still , maybe this be something weird about my brain and no one else have one of these thing in there , so to find out , we scan a bunch of other people and find that pretty much everyone have that little face - processing region in a similar neighborhood of the brain .     so the next question be , what do this thing really do ? be it really specialize just for face recognition ? well , maybe not , right ? maybe it respond not only to face but to any body part . maybe it respond to anything human or anything alive or anything round . the only way to be really sure that that region be specialize for face recognition be to rule out all of those hypothesis . so we spend much of the next couple of year scan subject while they look at lot of different kind of image , and we show that that part of the brain respond strongly when you look at any image that be face of any kind , and it respond much less strongly to any image you show that be not a face , like some of these .     so have we finally nail the case that this region be necessary for face recognition ? no , we have not . brain imaging can never tell you if a region be necessary for anything . all you can do with brain imaging be watch region turn on and off as people think different thought . to tell if a part of the brain be necessary for a mental function , you need to mess with it and see what happen , and normally we do not get to do that . but an amazing opportunity come about very recently when a couple of colleague of mine test this man who have epilepsy and who be show here in his hospital bed where he be just have electrode place on the surface of his brain to identify the source of his seizure . so it turn out by total chance that two of the electrode happen to be right on top of his face area . so with the patient 's consent , the doctor ask he what happen when they electrically stimulate that part of his brain . now , the patient do not know where those electrode be , and he be never hear of the face area . so let us watch what happen . it be go to start with a control condition that will say " sham " nearly invisibly in red in the low left , when no current be deliver , and you 'll hear the neurologist speak to the patient first . so let us watch .     ( video ) neurologist : okay , just look at my face and tell I what happen when I do this . all right ?     patient : okay .     neurologist : one , two , three .     patient : nothing . neurologist : nothing ? okay . I be go to do it one more time . look at my face . one , two , three .     patient : you just turn into somebody else . your face metamorphose . your nose get saggy , it go to the left . you almost look like somebody I would see before , but somebody different . that be a trip . ( laughter )     nancy kanwisher : so this experiment — ( applause ) — this experiment finally nail the case that this region of the brain be not only selectively responsive to face but causally involved in face perception . so I go through all of these detail about the face region to show you what it take to really establish that a part of the brain be selectively involve in a specific mental process . next , I 'll go through much more quickly some of the other specialized region of the brain that we and other have find . so to do this , I 've spend a lot of time in the scanner over the last month so I can show you these thing in my brain .     so let us get start . here be my right hemisphere . so we be orient like that . you be look at my head this way . imagine take the skull off and look at the surface of the brain like that . okay , now as you can see , the surface of the brain be all fold up . so that be not good . stuff could be hide in there . we want to see the whole thing , so let us inflate it so we can see the whole thing . next , let us find that face area I 've be talk about that respond to image like these . to see that , let us turn the brain around and look on the inside surface on the bottom , and there it be , that be my face area . just to the right of that be another region that be show in purple that respond when you process color information , and near those region be other region that be involve in perceive place , like right now , I be see this layout of space around I and these region in green right there be really active . there be another one out on the outside surface again where there be a couple more face region as well . also in this vicinity be a region that be selectively involve in process visual motion , like these move dot here , and that be in yellow at the bottom of the brain , and near that be a region that respond when you look at image of body and body part like these , and that region be show in lime green at the bottom of the brain .     now all these region I 've show you so far be involve in specific aspect of visual perception . do we also have specialize brain region for other sense , like hear ? yes , we do . so if we turn the brain around a little bit , here be a region in dark blue that we report just a couple of month ago , and this region respond strongly when you hear sound with pitch , like these . ( siren ) ( cello music ) ( doorbell ) in contrast , that same region do not respond strongly when you hear perfectly familiar sound that do not have a clear pitch , like these . ( chomp ) ( drum roll ) ( toilet flushing )     okay . next to the pitch region be another set of region that be selectively responsive when you hear the sound of speech .     okay , now let us look at these same region . in my left hemisphere , there be a similar arrangement — not identical , but similar — and most of the same region be in here , albeit sometimes different in size .     now , everything I 've show you so far be region that be involve in different aspect of perception , vision and hearing . do we also have specialize brain region for really fancy , complicated mental process ? yes , we do . so here in pink be my language region . so it be be know for a very long time that that general vicinity of the brain be involve in processing language , but we show very recently that these pink region respond extremely selectively . they respond when you understand the meaning of a sentence , but not when you do other complex mental thing , like mental arithmetic or hold information in memory or appreciate the complex structure in a piece of music .     the most amazing region that be be find yet be this one right here in turquoise . this region respond when you think about what another person be think . so that may seem crazy , but actually , we human do this all the time . you be do this when you realize that your partner be go to be worried if you do not call home to say you be run late . I be do this with that region of my brain right now when I realize that you guy be probably now wonder about all that gray , uncharted territory in the brain , and what be up with that ?     well , I be wonder about that too , and we be run a bunch of experiment in my lab right now to try to find a number of other possible specialization in the brain for other very specific mental function . but importantly , I do not think we have specialization in the brain for every important mental function , even mental function that may be critical for survival . in fact , a few year ago , there be a scientist in my lab who become quite convinced that he have find a brain region for detect food , and it respond really strongly in the scanner when people look at image like this . and far , he find a similar response in more or less the same location in 10 out of 12 subject . so he be pretty stoked , and he be run around the lab tell everyone that he be go to go on " oprah " with his big discovery . but then he devise the critical test : he show subject image of food like this and compare they to image with very similar color and shape , but that be not food , like these . and his region respond the same to both set of image . so it be not a food area , it be just a region that like color and shape . so much for " oprah . "     but then the question , of course , be , how do we process all this other stuff that we do not have specialize brain region for ? well , I think the answer be that in addition to these highly specialized component that I 've be describe , we also have a lot of very general- purpose machinery in our head that enable we to tackle whatever problem come along . in fact , we 've show recently that these region here in white respond whenever you do any difficult mental task at all — well , of the seven that we 've test . so each of the brain region that I 've describe to you today be present in approximately the same location in every normal subject . I could take any of you , pop you in the scanner , and find each of those region in your brain , and it would look a lot like my brain , although the region would be slightly different in their exact location and in their size .     what be important to I about this work be not the particular location of these brain region , but the simple fact that we have selective , specific component of mind and brain in the first place . I mean , it could have be otherwise . the brain could have be a single , general - purpose processor , more like a kitchen knife than a swiss army knife . instead , what brain imaging have deliver be this rich and interesting picture of the human mind . so we have this picture of very general - purpose machinery in our head in addition to this surprising array of very specialized component .     it be early day in this enterprise . we 've paint only the first brushstroke in our neural portrait of the human mind . the most fundamental question remain unanswered . so for example , what do each of these region do exactly ? why do we need three face area and three place area , and what be the division of labor between they ? second , how be all these thing connect in the brain ? with diffusion imaging , you can trace bundle of neuron that connect to different part of the brain , and with this method show here , you can trace the connection of individual neuron in the brain , potentially someday give we a wiring diagram of the entire human brain . third , how do all of this very systematic structure get build , both over development in childhood and over the evolution of our specie ? to address question like that , scientist be now scan other specie of animal , and they be also scan human infant .     many people justify the high cost of neuroscience research by point out that it may help we someday to treat brain disorder like alzheimer 's and autism . that be a hugely important goal , and I would be thrill if any of my work contribute to it , but fix thing that be break in the world be not the only thing that be worth do . the effort to understand the human mind and brain be worthwhile even if it never lead to the treatment of a single disease . what could be more thrilling than to understand the fundamental mechanism that underlie human experience , to understand , in essence , who we be ? this be , I think , the great scientific quest of all time .     ( applause )  
   you be look at a woman who be publicly silent for a decade . obviously , that be change , but only recently .     it be several month ago that I give my very first major public talk at the forbe 30 under 30 summit : 1,500 brilliant people , all under the age of 30 . that mean that in 1998 , the old among the group be only 14 , and the young , just four . I joke with they that some might only have hear of I from rap song . yes , I be in rap song . almost 40 rap song . ( laughter )     but the night of my speech , a surprising thing happen . at the age of 41 , I be hit on by a 27 - year - old guy . I know , right ? he be charming and I be flatter , and I decline . you know what his unsuccessful pickup line be ? he could make I feel 22 again . ( laughter ) ( applause ) I realize later that night , I be probably the only person over 40 who do not want to be 22 again . ( laughter ) ( applause )     at the age of 22 , I fall in love with my boss , and at the age of 24 , I learn the devastating consequence .     can I see a show of hand of anyone here who do not make a mistake or do something they regret at 22 ? yep . that be what I think . so like I , at 22 , a few of you may have also take wrong turn and fall in love with the wrong person , maybe even your boss . unlike I , though , your boss probably be not the president of the united states of america . of course , life be full of surprise .     not a day go by that I be not remind of my mistake , and I regret that mistake deeply .     in 1998 , after having be sweep up into an improbable romance , I be then sweep up into the eye of a political , legal and medium maelstrom like we have never see before . remember , just a few year early , news be consume from just three place : read a newspaper or magazine , listen to the radio , or watch television . that be it . but that be not my fate . instead , this scandal be bring to you by the digital revolution . that mean we could access all the information we want , when we want it , anytime , anywhere , and when the story break in january 1998 , it break online . it be the first time the traditional news be usurped by the internet for a major news story , a click that reverberate around the world .     what that mean for I personally be that overnight I go from be a completely private figure to a publicly humiliate one worldwide . I be patient zero of lose a personal reputation on a global scale almost instantaneously .     this rush to judgment , enable by technology , lead to mob of virtual stone - thrower . grant , it be before social medium , but people could still comment online , email story , and , of course , email cruel joke . news source plaster photo of I all over to sell newspaper , banner ad online , and to keep people tune to the tv . do you recall a particular image of I , say , wear a beret ?     now , I admit I make mistake , especially wear that beret . but the attention and judgment that I receive , not the story , but that I personally receive , be unprecedented . I be brand as a tramp , tart , slut , whore , bimbo , and , of course , that woman . I be see by many but actually know by few . and I get it : it be easy to forget that that woman be dimensional , have a soul , and be once unbroken .     when this happen to I 17 year ago , there be no name for it . now we call it cyberbullye and online harassment . today , I want to share some of my experience with you , talk about how that experience have help shape my cultural observation , and how I hope my past experience can lead to a change that result in less suffering for other .     in 1998 , I lose my reputation and my dignity . I lose almost everything , and I almost lose my life .     let I paint a picture for you . it be september of 1998 . I be sit in a windowless office room inside the office of the independent counsel underneath hum fluorescent light . I be listen to the sound of my voice , my voice on surreptitiously tape phone call that a suppose friend have make the year before . I be here because I 've be legally require to personally authenticate all 20 hour of tape conversation . for the past eight month , the mysterious content of these tape have hang like the sword of damocle over my head . I mean , who can remember what they say a year ago ? scared and mortify , I listen , listen as I prattle on about the flotsam and jetsam of the day ; listen as I confess my love for the president , and , of course , my heartbreak ; listen to my sometimes catty , sometimes churlish , sometimes silly self be cruel , unforgiving , uncouth ; listen , deeply , deeply ashamed , to the bad version of myself , a self I do not even recognize .     a few day later , the starr report be release to congress , and all of those tape and transcript , those steal word , form a part of it . that people can read the transcript be horrific enough , but a few week later , the audio tape be air on tv , and significant portion make available online . the public humiliation be excruciating . life be almost unbearable .     this be not something that happen with regularity back then in 1998 , and by this , I mean the stealing of people 's private word , action , conversation or photo , and then make they public — public without consent , public without context , and public without compassion .     fast forward 12 year to 2010 , and now social medium have be bear . the landscape have sadly become much more populated with instance like mine , whether or not someone actually make a mistake , and now it be for both public and private people . the consequence for some have become dire , very dire .     I be on the phone with my mom in september of 2010 , and we be talk about the news of a young college freshman from rutgers university name tyler clementi . sweet , sensitive , creative tyler be secretly webcamme by his roommate while be intimate with another man . when the online world learn of this incident , the ridicule and cyberbullying ignite . a few day later , tyler jump from   the george washington bridge to his death . he be 18 .     my mom be beside herself about what happen to tyler and his family , and she be gutte with pain in a way that I just could not quite understand , and then eventually I realize she be relive 1998 , relive a time when she sit by my bed every night , relive a time when she make I shower with the bathroom door open , and relive a time when both of my parent fear that I would be humiliate to death , literally .     today , too many parent have not have the chance to step in and rescue their love one . too many have learn of their child 's suffering and humiliation after it be too late . tyler 's tragic , senseless death be a turning point for I . it serve to recontextualize my experience , and I then begin to look at the world of humiliation and bully around I and see something different . in 1998 , we have no way of know where this brave new technology call the internet would take we . since then , it have connect people in unimaginable way , join lose sibling , save life , launch revolution , but the darkness , cyberbullye , and slut - shame that I experience have mushroom . every day online , people , especially young people who be not developmentally equip to handle this , be so abuse and humiliate that they can not imagine live to the next day , and some , tragically , do not , and there be nothing virtual about that . childline , a u.k . nonprofit that be focus on help young people on various issue , release a staggering statistic late last year : from 2012 to 2013 , there be an 87 percent increase in call and email relate to cyberbullye . a meta - analysis do out of the netherland show that for the first time , cyberbullye be lead to suicidal ideation more significantly than offline bullying . and you know what shock I , although it should not have , be other research last year that determine humiliation be a more intensely feel emotion than either happiness or even anger .     cruelty to other be nothing new , but online , technologically enhance shaming be amplify , uncontained , and permanently accessible . the echo of embarrassment use to extend only as far as your family , village , school or community , but now it be the online community too . million of people , often anonymously , can stab you with their word , and that be a lot of pain , and there be no perimeter around how many people can publicly observe you and put you in a public stockade . there be a very personal price to public humiliation , and the growth of the internet have jack up that price .     for nearly two decade now , we have slowly be sow the seed of shame and public humiliation in our cultural soil , both on- and offline . gossip website , paparazzi , reality programming , politic , news outlet and sometimes hacker all traffic in shame . it be lead to desensitization and a permissive environment online which lend itself to trolling , invasion of privacy , and cyberbullye . this shift have create what professor nicolaus mills call a culture of humiliation . consider a few prominent example just from the past six month alone . snapchat , the service which be use mainly by young generation and claim that its message only have the lifespan of a few second . you can imagine the range of content that that get . a third - party app which snapchatter use to preserve the lifespan of the message be hack , and 100,000 personal conversation , photo , and video be leak online to now have a lifespan of forever . jennifer lawrence and several other actor have their icloud account hack , and private , intimate , nude photo be plaster across the internet without their permission . one gossip website have over five million hit for this one story . and what about the sony picture cyberhacke ? the document which receive the most attention be private email that have maximum public embarrassment value .     but in this culture of humiliation , there be another kind of price tag attach to public shaming . the price do not measure the cost to the victim , which tyler and too many other , notably woman , minority , and member of the lgbtq community have pay , but the price measure the profit of those who prey on they . this invasion of other be a raw material , efficiently and ruthlessly mine , package and sell at a profit . a marketplace have emerge where public humiliation be a commodity and shame be an industry . how be the money make ? click . the more shame , the more click . the more click , the more advertising dollar . we be in a dangerous cycle . the more we click on this kind of gossip , the more numb we get to the human life behind it , and the more numb we get , the more we click . all the while , someone be make money off of the back   of someone else 's suffering . with every click , we make a choice . the more we saturate our culture with public shaming , the more accept it be , the more we will see behavior like cyberbullye , trolling , some form of hacking , and online harassment . why ? because you all have humiliation at their core . this behavior be a symptom of the culture we 've create . just think about it .     change behavior begin with evolve belief . we 've see that to be true with racism , homophobia , and plenty of other bias , today and in the past . as we 've change belief about same - sex marriage , more people have be offer equal freedom . when we begin value sustainability , more people begin to recycle . so as far as our culture of humiliation go , what we need be a cultural revolution . public shame as a blood sport have to stop , and it be time for an intervention on the internet and in our culture .     the shift begin with something simple , but it be not easy . we need to return to a long - hold value of compassion — compassion and empathy . online , we 've get a compassion deficit , an empathy crisis .     researcher brené brown say , and I quote , " shame can not survive empathy . " shame can not survive empathy . I 've see some very dark day in my life , and it be the compassion and empathy from my family , friend , professional , and sometimes even stranger that save I . even empathy from one person can make a difference . the theory of minority influence , propose by social psychologist serge moscovici , say that even in small number , when there be consistency over time , change can happen . in the online world , we can foster minority influence by become upstander . to become an upstander mean instead of bystander apathy , we can post a positive comment for someone or report a bullying situation . trust I , compassionate comment help abate the negativity . we can also counteract the culture by support organization that deal with these kind of issue , like the tyler clementi foundation in the u.s . , in the u.k . , there be anti - bullying pro , and in australia , there be project rockit .     we talk a lot about our right to freedom of expression , but we need to talk more about our responsibility to freedom of expression . we all want to be hear , but let us acknowledge the difference between speak up with intention and speak up for attention . the internet be   the superhighway for the i d , but online , show empathy to other benefit we all and help create a safe and well world . we need to communicate online with compassion , consume news with compassion , and click with compassion . just imagine walk a mile in someone else 's headline . I would like to end on a personal note . in the past nine month , the question I 've be   ask the most be why . why now ? why be I   stick my head above the parapet ? you can read between the line in those question , and the answer have nothing to do with politic . the top note answer be and be because it be time : time to stop tip - toeing around my past ; time to stop live a life of opprobrium ; and time to take back my narrative .     it be also not just about save myself . anyone who be suffer from shame and public humiliation need to know one thing : you can survive it . I know it be hard . it may not be painless , quick or easy , but you can insist on a different ending to your story . have compassion for yourself . we all deserve compassion , and to live both online and off in a more compassionate world .     thank you for listen .     ( applause )  
   let I show you something .     ( video ) girl : okay , that be a cat sit in a bed . the boy be pet the elephant . those be people that be go on an airplane . that be a big airplane .     fei - fei li : this be a three - year - old child describe what she see in a series of photo . she might still have a lot to learn about this world , but she be already an expert at one very important task : to make sense of what she see . our society be more technologically advanced than ever . we send people to the moon , we make phone that talk to we or customize radio station that can play only music we like . yet , our most advanced machine and computer still struggle at this task . so I be here today to give you a progress report on the late advance in our research in computer vision , one of the most frontier and potentially revolutionary technology in computer science .     yes , we have prototype car that can drive by themselves , but without smart vision , they can not really tell the difference between a crumpled paper bag on the road , which can be run over , and a rock that size , which should be avoid . we have make fabulous megapixel camera , but we have not deliver sight to the blind . drone can fly over massive land , but do not have enough vision technology to help we to track the change of the rainforest . security camera be everywhere , but they do not alert we when a child be drown in a swimming pool . photo and video be become an integral part of global life . they be be generate at a pace that be far beyond what any human , or team of human , could hope to view , and you and I be contribute to that at this ted . yet our most advanced software be still struggle at understanding and manage this enormous content . so in other word , collectively as a society , we be very much blind , because our smart   machine be still blind .     " why be this so hard ? " you may ask . camera can take picture like this one by convert light into a two - dimensional array of number know as pixel , but these be just lifeless number . they do not carry meaning in themselves . just like to hear be not the same as to listen , to take picture be not the same as to see , and by see , we really mean understanding . in fact , it take mother nature 540 million year of hard work to do this task , and much of that effort go into develop the visual processing apparatus of our brain , not the eye themselves . so vision begin with the eye , but it truly take place in the brain .     so for 15 year now , start from my ph.d . at caltech and then lead stanford 's vision lab , I 've be work with my mentor , collaborator and student to teach computer to see . our research field be call computer vision and machine learning . it be part of the general field of artificial intelligence . so ultimately , we want to teach the machine to see just like we do : name object , identify people , infer 3d geometry of thing , understand relation , emotion , action and intention . you and I weave together entire story of people , place and thing the moment we lay our gaze on they .     the first step towards this goal be to teach a computer to see object , the building block of the visual world . in its simple term , imagine this teaching process as show the computer some training image of a particular object , let us say cat , and design a model that learn from these training image . how hard can this be ? after all , a cat be just a collection of shape and color , and this be what we do in the early day of object modeling . we would tell the computer algorithm in a mathematical language that a cat have a round face , a chubby body , two pointy ear , and a long tail , and that look all fine . but what about this cat ? ( laughter ) it be all curl up . now you have to add another shape and viewpoint to the object model . but what if cat be hide ? what about these silly cat ? now you get my point . even something as simple as a household pet can present an infinite number of variation to the object model , and that be just one object .     so about eight year ago , a very simple and profound observation change my thinking . no one tell a child how to see , especially in the early year . they learn this through real - world experience and example . if you consider a child 's eye as a pair of biological camera , they take one picture about every 200 millisecond , the average time an eye movement be make . so by age three , a child would have see hundred of million of picture of the real world . that be a lot of training example . so instead of focus solely on well and well algorithm , my insight be to give the algorithm the kind of training datum that a child be give through experience in both quantity and quality .     once we know this , we know we need to collect a data set that have far more image than we have ever have before , perhaps thousand of time more , and together with professor kai li at princeton university , we launch the imagenet project in 2007 . luckily , we do not have to mount a camera on our head and wait for many year . we go to the internet , the big treasure trove of picture that human have ever create . we download nearly a billion image and use crowdsource technology like the amazon mechanical turk platform to help we to label these image . at its peak , imagenet be one of the big employer of the amazon mechanical turk worker : together , almost 50,000 worker from 167 country around the world help we to clean , sort and label nearly a billion candidate image . that be how much effort it take to capture even a fraction of the imagery a child 's mind take in in the early developmental year .     in hindsight , this idea of use big datum to train computer algorithm may seem obvious now , but back in 2007 , it be not so obvious . we be fairly alone on this journey for quite a while . some very friendly colleague advise I to do something more useful for my tenure , and we be constantly struggle for research funding . once , I even joke to my graduate student that I would just reopen my dry cleaner 's shop to fund imagenet . after all , that be how I fund my college year .     so we carry on . in 2009 , the imagenet project deliver a database of 15 million image across 22,000 class of object and thing organize by everyday english word . in both quantity and quality , this be an unprecedented scale . as an example , in the case of cat , we have more than 62,000 cat of all kind of look and pose and across all specie of domestic and wild cat . we be thrill to have put together imagenet , and we want the whole research world to benefit from it , so in the ted fashion , we open up the entire datum set to the worldwide research community for free . ( applause )     now that we have the datum to nourish our computer brain , we be ready to come back to the algorithm themselves . as it turn out , the wealth of information provide by imagenet be a perfect match to a particular class of machine learning algorithm call convolutional neural network , pioneer by kunihiko fukushima , geoff hinton , and yann lecun back in the 1970 and ' 80 . just like the brain consist of billion of highly connect neuron , a basic operate unit in a neural network be a neuron - like node . it take input from other node and send output to other . moreover , these hundred of thousand or even million of node be organize in hierarchical layer , also similar to the brain . in a typical neural network we use to train our object recognition model , it have 24 million node , 140 million parameter , and 15 billion connection . that be an enormous model . power by the massive datum from imagenet and the modern cpus and gpus to train such a humongous model , the convolutional neural network blossom in a way that no one expect . it become the win architecture to generate exciting new result in object recognition . this be a computer tell we this picture contain a cat and where the cat be . of course there be more thing than cat , so here be a computer algorithm tell we the picture contain a boy and a teddy bear ; a dog , a person , and a small kite in the background ; or a picture of very busy thing like a man , a skateboard , railing , a lampost , and so on . sometimes , when the computer be not so confident about what it see , we have teach it to be smart enough to give we a safe answer instead of commit too much , just like we would do , but other time our computer algorithm be remarkable at tell we what exactly the object be , like the make , model , year of the car .     we apply this algorithm to million of google street view image across hundred of american city , and we have learn something really interesting : first , it confirm our common wisdom that car price correlate very well with household income . but surprisingly , car price also correlate well with crime rate in city , or voting pattern by zip code .     so wait a minute . be that it ? have the computer already match or even surpass human capability ? not so fast . so far , we have just teach the computer to see object . this be like a small child learn to utter a few noun . it be an incredible accomplishment , but it be only the first step . soon , another developmental milestone will be hit , and child begin to communicate in sentence . so instead of say this be a cat in the picture , you already hear the little girl tell we this be a cat lie on a bed .     so to teach a computer to see a picture and generate sentence , the marriage between big datum and machine learn algorithm have to take another step . now , the computer have to learn from both picture as well as natural language sentence generate by human . just like the brain integrate vision and language , we develop a model that connect part of visual thing like visual snippet with word and phrase in sentence .     about four month ago , we finally tie all this together and produce one of the first computer vision model that be capable of generate a human - like sentence when it see a picture for the first time . now , I be ready to show you what the computer say when it see the picture that the little girl see at the beginning of this talk .     ( video ) computer : a man be stand next to an elephant . a large airplane sit on top of an airport runway .     ffl : of course , we be still work hard to improve our algorithm , and it still have a lot to learn . ( applause )     and the computer still make mistake .     ( video ) computer : a cat lie on a bed in a blanket .     ffl : so of course , when it see too many cat , it think everything might look like a cat .     ( video ) computer : a young boy be hold a baseball bat . ( laughter )     ffl : or , if it have not see a toothbrush , it confuse it with a baseball bat .     ( video ) computer : a man ride a horse down a street next to a building . ( laughter )     ffl : we have not teach art 101 to the computer .     ( video ) computer : a zebra stand in a field of grass .     ffl : and it have not learn to appreciate the stunning beauty of nature like you and I do .     so it have be a long journey . to get from age zero to three be hard . the real challenge be to go from three to 13 and far beyond . let I remind you with this picture of the boy and the cake again . so far , we have teach the computer to see object or even tell we a simple story when see a picture .     ( video ) computer : a person sit at a table with a cake .     ffl : but there be so much more   to this picture than just a person and a cake . what the computer do not see be that this be a special italian cake that be only serve during easter time . the boy be wear his favorite t - shirt give to he as a gift by his father after a trip to sydney , and you and I can all tell how happy he be and what be exactly on his mind at that moment .     this be my son leo . on my quest for visual intelligence , I think of leo constantly and the future world he will live in . when machine can see , doctor and nurse will have extra pair of tireless eye to help they to diagnose and take care of patient . car will run smart and safe on the road . robot , not just human , will help we to brave the disaster zone to save the trap and wound . we will discover new specie ,   well material , and explore unseen frontier with the help of the machine .     little by little , we be give sight to the machine . first , we teach they to see . then , they help we to see well . for the first time , human eye will not be the only one ponder and explore our world . we will not only use the machine for their intelligence , we will also collaborate with they in way that we can not even imagine .     this be my quest : to give computer visual intelligence and to create a well future for leo and for the world .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   when I write my memoir , the publisher be really confused . be it about I as a child refugee , or as a woman who set up a high - tech software company back in the 1960 , one that go public and eventually employ over 8,500 people ? or be it as a mother of an autistic child ? or as a philanthropist that be now give away serious money ? well , it turn out , I be all of these . so let I tell you my story .     all that I be stem from when I get onto a train in vienna , part of the kindertransport that save nearly 10,000 jewish child from nazi europe . I be five year old , clutch the hand of my nine - year - old sister and have very little idea as to   what be go on . " what be england and   why be I go there ? " I be only alive because so long ago ,   I be help by generous stranger . I be lucky , and doubly lucky to be later reunite with my birth parent . but , sadly , I never bond   with they again . but I 've do more in the seven decade since that miserable day    when my mother put I on the train than I would ever have dream possible . and I love england , my adopt country , with a passion that perhaps only someone who have lose their human right can feel . I decide to make mine a life that be worth save . and then , I just get on with it . ( laughter )     let I take you back to the early 1960 . to get past the gender issue of the time , I set up my own software house at one of the first such startup in britain . but it be also a company of woman , a company for woman , an early social business . and people laugh at the very idea because software , at that time , be give away free with hardware . nobody would buy software , certainly not from a woman . although woman be then come out of the university with decent degree , there be a glass ceiling to our progress . and I would hit that glass ceiling too often , and I want opportunity for woman .     I recruit professionally qualified woman who have leave the industry on marriage , or when their first child be expect and structure they into a home - work organization . we pioneer the concept of woman go back into the workforce after a career break . we pioneer all sort of new , flexible work method : job share , profit - sharing ,   and eventually , co - ownership when I take a quarter of the company into the hand of the staff at no cost to anyone but I . for year , I be the first woman this , or the only woman that . and in those day , I could not work on the stock exchange , I could not drive a bus or fly an airplane . indeed , I could not open a bank account without my husband 's permission . my generation of woman fight the battle for the right to work and the right for equal pay .     nobody really expect much   from people at work or in society because all the expectation then    be about home and   family responsibility . and I could not really face that , so I start to challenge the convention of the time , even to the extent of change my name from " stephanie " to " steve " in my business development letter , so as to get through the door before anyone realize that he be a she . ( laughter )     my company , call freelance programmer , and that be precisely what it be , could not have start small :   on the dining room table , and finance by the equivalent of 100 dollar in today 's term , and finance by my labor and   by borrow against the house . my interest be scientific ,   the market be commercial — thing such as payroll , which I find rather boring . so I have to compromise with   operational research work , which have the intellectual challenge   that interest I and the commercial value   that be value by the client : thing like scheduling freight train , time - table bus , stock control , lot and lot of stock control . and eventually , the work come in . we disguise the domestic and part - time nature of the staff by offer fix price , one of the very first to do so . and who would have guess that the programming of the black box flight recorder   of supersonic concord would have be do by a bunch   of woman work in their own home . ( applause )     all we use be a simple   " trust the staff " approach and a simple telephone . we even use to ask job applicant ,   " do you have access to a telephone ? "     an early project be to develop software standard on management control protocol . and software be and still be a maddeningly hard - to - control activity , so that be enormously valuable . we use the standard ourselves , we be even pay to update   they over the year , and eventually , they be adopt by nato . our programmer — remember , only woman , include gay and transgender — work with pencil and paper to develop flowchart define each task to be do . and they then write code ,   usually machine code , sometimes binary code , which be then send by mail to a data center to be punch onto paper tape or card and then re - punch ,   in order to verify it . all this , before it ever get near a computer . that be program in the early 1960 .     in 1975 , 13 year from startup , equal opportunity legislation   come in in britain and that make it illegal to have   our pro - female policy . and as an example of   unintended consequence , my female company have to let the man in . ( laughter )     when I start my company of woman , the man say , " how interesting , because it only work because it be small . " and later , as it become sizable ,   they accept , " yes , it be sizable now , but of no strategic interest . " and later , when it be a company value at over three billion dollar , and I would make 70 of the staff   into millionaire , they sort of say , " well do , steve ! " ( laughter ) ( applause )     you can always tell ambitious woman by the shape of our head : they be flat on top for be   pat patronizingly . ( laughter ) ( applause ) and we have large foot to stand away from the kitchen sink . ( laughter )     let I share with you   two secret of success : surround yourself with first - class people and people that you like ; and choose your partner very , very carefully . because the other day when I say ,   " my husband 's an angel , " a woman complain — " you be lucky , " she say , " mine be still alive . " ( laughter )     if success be easy ,   we would all be millionaire . but in my case , it come in the midst of family trauma and indeed , crisis . our late son , gile , be an only child , a beautiful , contented baby . and then , at two and a half , like a changeling in a fairy story , he lose the little speech that he have and turn into a wild ,   unmanageable toddler . not the terrible two ; he be profoundly autistic   and he never speak again . gile be the first resident in the first house of the first charity that I set up to pioneer service for autism . and then there be be a groundbreaking prior 's court school for pupil with autism and a medical research charity , again , all for autism . because whenever I find a gap in service , I try to help . I like do new thing   and make new thing happen . and I 've just start a three - year   think tank for autism .     and so that some of my wealth do go back to the industry from which it stem , I 've also found   the oxford internet institute and other it venture . the oxford internet institute focus not on the technology , but on the social , economic , legal and ethical issue of the internet .     gile die unexpectedly 17 year ago now . and I have learn to live without he , and I have learn to live   without his need of I . philanthropy be all that I do now . I need never worry about getting lose because several charity would quickly come and find I . ( laughter )     it be one thing to have an idea   for an enterprise , but as many people in this room will know , make it happen be a very difficult thing and it demand extraordinary energy , self - belief and determination , the courage to risk family and home , and a 24/7 commitment   that border on the obsessive . so it be just as well that I be a workaholic . I believe in the beauty of work when we do it properly and in humility . work be not just something I do when I would rather be do something else .     we live our life forward . so what have all that teach I ? I learn that tomorrow 's   never go to be like today , and certainly nothing like yesterday . and that make I able to cope with change , indeed , eventually to welcome change , though I be tell I be still very difficult .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   well , you know , sometimes the most important thing come in the small package . I be go to try to convince you , in the 15 minute I have , that microbe have a lot to say about question such as , " be we alone ? " and they can tell we more about not only life in our solar system but also maybe beyond , and this be why I be track they down in the most impossible place on earth , in extreme environment where condition be really push they to the brink of survival . actually , sometimes I too , when I be try to follow they too close . but here be the thing : we be the only advanced civilization in the solar system , but that do not mean that there be no microbial life nearby . in fact , the planet and moon you see here could host life — all of they — and we know that , and it be a strong possibility . and if we be go to find life on those moon and planet , then we would answer question such as , be we alone in the solar system ? where be we come from ? do we have family in the neighborhood ? be there life beyond our solar system ?     and we can ask all those question because there have be a revolution in our understanding of what a habitable planet be , and today , a habitable planet be a planet that have a zone where water can stay stable , but to I this be a horizontal definition of habitability , because it involve a distance to a star , but there be another dimension to habitability , and this be a vertical dimension . think of it as condition in the subsurface of a planet where you be very far away from a sun , but you still have water , energy , nutrients , which for some of they mean food , and a protection . and when you look at the earth , very far away from any sunlight , deep in the ocean , you have life thrive and it use only chemistry for life process .     so when you think of it   at that point , all wall collapse . you have no limitation , basically . and if you have be look at the headline lately , then you will see that we have discover a subsurface ocean on europa , on ganymede , on enceladus , on titan , and now we be find a geyser and hot spring on enceladus , our solar system be turn into a giant spa . for anybody who have go to a spa know how much microbe like that , right ? ( laughter )     so at that point , think also about mar . there be no life possible at the surface of mar today , but it might still be hide underground .     so , we have be make progress in our understanding of habitability , but we also have be make progress in our understanding of what the signature of life be on earth . and you can have what we call organic molecule , and these be the brick of life , and you can have fossil , and you can mineral , biomineral , which be due to the reaction between bacteria and rock , and of course you can have gas in the atmosphere . and when you look at those tiny green algae on the right of the slide here , they be the direct descendant of those who have be pump oxygen a billion year ago in the atmosphere of the earth . when they do that , they poison 90 percent of the life at the surface of the earth , but they be the reason why you be breathe this air today .     but as much as our understanding grow of all of these thing , there be one question we still can not answer , and this be , where be we come from ? and you know , it be get bad , because we will not be able to find the physical evidence of where we be come from on this planet , and the reason be be that anything that be old than four billion year be go . all record be go , erase by plate tectonic and erosion . this be what I call the earth 's biological horizon . beyond this horizon we do not know where we be come from .     so be everything lose ? well , maybe not . and we might be able to find evidence of our own origin in the most unlikely place , and this place in mar .     how be this possible ? well clearly at the beginning of the solar system , mar and the earth be bombard by giant asteroid and comet , and there be ejecta from these impact all over the place . earth and mar keep throw rock at each other for a very long time . piece of rock land on the earth . piece of the earth land on mar . so clearly , those two planet may have be seed by the same material . so yeah , maybe granddady be sit there on the surface and wait for we . but that also mean that we can go to mar and try to find trace of our own origin . mar may hold that secret for we . this be why mar be so special to we .     but for that to happen , mar need to be habitable at the time when condition be right . so be mar habitable ? we have a number of mission tell we exactly the same thing today . at the time when life appear on the earth , mar do have an ocean , it have volcano , it have lake , and it have delta like the beautiful picture you see here . this picture be send by the curiosity   rover only a few week ago . it show the remnant of a delta , and this picture tell we something : water be abundant and stay founte at the surface for a very long time . this be good news for life . life chemistry take a long time to actually happen .     so this be extremely good news , but do that mean that if we go there , life will be easy to find on mar ? not necessarily .     here be what happen : at the time when life explode at the surface of the earth , then everything go south for mar , literally . the atmosphere be strip away by solar wind , mar lose its magnetosphere , and then cosmic ray and u.v . bombard the surface and water escape to space and go underground . so if we want to be able to understand , if we want to be able to find those trace of the signature of life at the surface of mar , if they be there , we need to understand what be the impact of each of these event on the preservation of its record . only then will we be able to know where those signature be hide , and only then will we be able to send our rover to the right place where we can sample those rock that may be tell we something really important about who we be , or , if not , maybe tell we that somewhere , independently , life have appear on another planet .     so to do that , it be easy . you only need to go back 3.5 billion year ago in the past of a planet . we just need a time machine .     easy , right ? well , actually , it be . look around you — that be planet earth . this be our time machine . geologist be use it to go back in the past of our own planet . I be use it a little bit differently . I use planet earth to go in very extreme environment where condition be similar to those of mar at the time when the climate change , and there I be try   to understand what happen . what be the signature of life ? what be leave ? how be we go to find it ? so for one moment now I be go to take you with I on a trip into that time machine .     and now , what you see here , we be at 4,500 meter in the ande , but in fact we be less than a billion year after the earth and mar form . the earth and mar will have look pretty much exactly like that — volcano everywhere , evaporate lake everywhere , mineral , hot spring , and then you see those mound on the shore of those lake ? those be build by the descendant of the first organism that give we the first fossil on earth .     but if we want to understand what be   go on , we need to go a little far . and the other thing about those site be that exactly like on mar three and a half billion year ago , the climate be change very fast , and water and ice be disappear . but we need to go back to that time when everything change on mar , and to do that , we need to go higher . why be that ? because when you go higher , the atmosphere be get thin , it be get more unstable , the temperature be get cool , and you have a lot more u.v . radiation . basically , you be get to those condition on mar when everything change .     so I be not promise anything about a leisurely trip on the time machine . you be not go to be sit in that time machine . you have to haul 1,000 pound of equipment to the summit of this 20,000 - foot volcano in the ande here . that be about 6,000 meter . and you also have to sleep on 42 - degree slope and really hope that there will not be any earthquake that night . but when we get to the summit , we actually find the lake we come for . at this altitude , this lake be experience exactly the same condition as those on mar three and a half billion year ago . and now we have to change our voyage into an inner voyage inside that lake , and to do that , we have to remove our mountain gear and actually don suit and go for it . but at the time we enter that lake , at the very moment we enter that lake , we be step back three and a half billion year in the past of another planet , and then we be go to get the answer come for . life be everywhere , absolutely everywhere . everything you see in this picture be a live organism . maybe not so the diver , but everything else . but this picture be very deceiving . life be abundant in those lake , but like in many place on earth   right now and due to climate change , there be a huge loss in biodiversity . in the sample that we take back home , 36 percent of the bacteria in those lake be compose of three specie , and those three specie be the one that have survive so far .     here be another lake , right next to the first one . the red color you see here be not due to mineral . it be actually due to the presence of a tiny algae . in this region , the u.v . radiation be really nasty . anywhere on earth , 11 be consider to be extreme . during u.v . storm there , the u.v . index reach 43 . spf 30 be not go to do anything   to you over there , and the water be so transparent in those lake that the algae have nowhere to hide , really , and so they be develop their own sunscreen , and this be the red color you see . but they can adapt only so far , and then when all the water be go from the surface , microbe have only one solution leave : they go underground . and those microbe , the rock you see in that slide here , well , they be actually live inside rock and they be use the protection of the translucence of the rock to get the good part of the u.v . and discard the part that could actually damage their dna . and this be why we be take our rover to train they to search   for life on mar in these area , because if there be life on mar three and a half billion year ago , it have to use the same strategy to actually protect itself . now , it be pretty obvious that go to extreme environment be help we very much for the exploration of mar   and to prepare mission . so far , it have help we to understand the geology of mar . it have help to understand the past climate of mar and its evolution , but also its habitability potential . our most recent rover on mar have discover trace of organic . yeah , there be organic at the surface of mar . and it also discover trace of methane . and we do not know yet if the methane in question be really from geology or biology . regardless , what we know be that because of the discovery , the hypothesis that there be still life present on mar today remain a viable one .     so by now , I think I have convince you that mars be very special to we , but it would be a mistake to think that mars be the only place in the solar system that be interesting to find potential microbial life . and the reason be because mar and the earth could have a common root to their tree of life , but when you go beyond mar , it be not that easy . celestial mechanic   be not make it so easy for an exchange of material between planet , and so if we be to discover life on those planet , it would be different from we . it would be a different type of life . but in the end , it might be just we , it might be we and mar , or it can be many tree of life in the solar system . I do not know the answer yet , but I can tell you something : no matter what the result be , no matter what that magic number be , it be go to give we a standard by which we be go to be able   to measure the life potential , abundance and diversity beyond our own solar system . and this can be achieve by our generation . this can be our legacy , but only if we dare to explore .     now , finally , if somebody tell you that look   for alien microbe be not cool because you can not have a philosophical conversation with they , let I show you why and how you can tell they they be wrong . well , organic material be go to tell you about environment , about complexity and about diversity . dna , or any information carrier , be go to tell you about adaptation , about evolution , about survival , about planetary change and about the transfer of information . all together , they be tell we what start as a microbial pathway , and why what start as a microbial pathway sometimes end up as a civilization or sometimes end up as a dead end .     look at the solar system , and look at the earth . on earth , there be many intelligent specie , but only one have achieve technology . right here in the journey of our own solar system , there be a very , very powerful message that say here be how we should look   for alien life , small and big . so yeah , microbe be talk and we be listen , and they be take we , one planet at a time and one moon at a time , towards their big brother out there . and they be tell we about diversity , they be tell we about abundance of life , and they be tell we how this life have survive thus far to reach civilization , intelligence , technology and , indeed , philosophy .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   my first love be for the night sky . love be complicated .     you be look at a fly - through of the   hubble space telescope ultra - deep field , one of the most distant image of our universe ever observe . everything you see here be a galaxy , comprise of billion of star each . and the farth galaxy be   a trillion , trillion kilometer away .     as an astrophysicist , I have the awesome privilege of study some of the most exotic object   in our universe . the object that have captivate I   from first crush throughout my career be supermassive ,   hyperactive black hole . weigh one to 10 billion time   the mass of our own sun , these galactic black hole   be devour material , at a rate of upward of   1,000 time more than your " average "   supermassive black hole . ( laughter )     these two characteristic , with a few other , make they quasar . at the same time , the object I study be produce some of the most powerful particle stream ever observe . these narrow stream , call jet , be move at 99.99 percent   of the speed of light , and be point directly at the earth .     these jetted , earth - point , hyperactive and supermassive black hole be call blazar , or blaze quasar . what make blazar so special be that they be some of the universe 's most efficient particle accelerator , transport incredible amount of energy throughout a galaxy .     here , I be show an artist 's conception of a blazar . the dinner plate by which   material fall onto the black hole be call the accretion disc , show here in blue . some of that material be slingshotte around the black hole and accelerate to insanely high speed   in the jet , show here in white . although the blazar system be rare , the process by which nature pull in material via a disk , and then fling some of it out via a jet , be more common . we 'll eventually zoom out of   the blazar system to show its approximate relationship to the large galactic context .     beyond the cosmic accounting of what go in to what go out , one of the hot topic in   blazar astrophysic right now be where the high - energy   jet emission come from . in this image , I be interested in where this white blob form and if , as a result , there be any   relationship between the jet and the accretion disc material .     clear answer to this question be almost completely inaccessible until 2008 , when nasa launch a new telescope that well detect gamma ray light — that is , light with energy a million time high than your standard x - ray scan . I simultaneously compare variation between the gamma ray light datum and the visible light datum from day to day and year to year , to well localize these gamma ray blob . my research show that in some instance , these blob form much close to the black hole than we initially think .     as we more confidently localize where these gamma ray   blob be form , we can well understand how jet be be accelerate , and ultimately reveal   the dynamic process by which some of the most fascinating object in our universe be form .     this all start as a love story . and it still be . this love transform I from   a curious , stargaze young girl to a professional astrophysicist , hot on the heel of celestial discovery . who know that chase after the universe would ground I so deeply to my mission here on earth . then again , when do we ever know where love 's first flutter will truly take we .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   hi . I be go to talk   to you today about laughter , and I just want to start   by think about the first time I can ever remember notice laughter . this be when I be a little girl . I would 've be about six . and I come across my parent do something unusual , where they be laugh . they be laugh very , very hard . they be lie on the floor laugh . they be scream with laughter . I do not know what they be   laugh at , but I want in . I want to be part of that , and I kind of sit around at the edge go , " hoo hoo ! " ( laughter ) now , incidentally , what they be laugh at be a song which people use to sing , which be base around sign in toilet on train tell you what you could and could not do in toilet on train . and the thing you have to remember about the english be , of course , we do have an immensely sophisticated sense of humor . ( laughter )     at the time , though , I do not understand anything of that . I just care about the laughter , and actually , as a neuroscientist , I 've come to care about it again . and it be a really weird thing to do . what I be go to do now be just play some example of real human being laugh , and I want you think about the sound people make and how odd that can be , and in fact how primitive laughter be as a sound . it be much more like an animal call than it be like speech . so here we 've get some laughter for you . the first one be pretty joyful .     ( audio : laugh )     now this next guy , I need he to breathe . there be a point in there where I be just , like , you 've get to get some air in there , mate , because he just sound like he be breathe out .     ( audio : laugh )     this have not be edit ; this be he .     ( audio : laugh ) ( laughter )     and finally we have —   this be a human female laughing . and laughter can take we to some pretty odd place in term of make noise . ( audio : laugh ) she actually say , " oh my god , what be that ? " in french . we be all kind of with she . I have no idea .     now , to understand laughter , you have to look at a part of the body that psychologist and neuroscientist do not normally spend much time look at , which be the ribcage , and it do not seem terribly exciting , but actually you be all use   your ribcage all the time . what you be all do   at the moment with your ribcage , and do not stop do it , be breathe . so you use the intercostal muscle , the muscle between your rib , to bring air in and out of your lung just by expand and contract your ribcage , and if I be to put a strap   around the outside of your chest call a breath belt , and just look   at that movement , you see a rather gentle sinusoidal movement , so that be breathe . you be all do it . do not stop . as soon as you start talk , you start use your breathing completely differently . so what I be do now be you see something much more like this . in talk , you use very fine movement of the ribcage to squeeze the air out — and in fact , we be the only animal that can do this . it be why we can talk at all .     now , both talk and breathing have a mortal enemy , and that enemy be laughter , because what happen when you laugh be those same muscle start to contract very regularly , and you get this very marked sort of zig - zagge , and that be just squeeze the air out of you . it literally be that basic a way of make a sound . you could be stamp on somebody , it be have the same effect . you be just squeeze air out , and each of those contraction — ha ! — give you a sound . and as the contraction run together , you can get these spasm , and that be when you start get these — ( wheezing ) — thing happen . I be brilliant at this . ( laughter )     now , in term of the science of laughter , there be not very much , but it do turn out that pretty much everything we think we know about laughter be wrong . so it be not at all unusual , for example , to hear people to say human be the only animal that laugh . nietzsche think that human be the only animal that laugh . in fact , you find laughter throughout the mammal . it be be well - describe and well - observe in primate , but you also see it in rat , and wherever you find it — human , primate , rat — you find it associate with thing like tickle . that be the same for human . you find it associate with play , and all mammal play . and wherever you find it , it be associate with interaction . so robert provine , who have do a lot of work on this , have point out that you be 30 time   more likely to laugh if you be with somebody else than if you be on your own , and where you find most laughter be in social interaction like conversation . so if you ask human being , " when do you laugh ? " they 'll talk about comedy and they 'll talk about humor and they 'll talk about joke . if you look at when they laugh , they be laugh with their friend . and when we laugh with people , we be hardly ever actually laugh at joke . you be laugh to show people that you understand they , that you agree with they , that you be part of the same group as they . you be laugh to show that you like they . you might even love they . you be do all that at the same time as talk to they , and the laughter be do a lot of that emotional work for you . something that robert provine have point out , as you can see here , and the reason why we be laugh when we hear those funny laugh at the start , and why I be laugh when I find my parent laugh , be that it be an enormously behaviorally contagious effect . you can catch laughter from somebody else , and you be more likely to catch laughter off somebody else if you know they . so it be still modulate by this social context . you have to put humor to one side   and think about the social   meaning of laughter because that be where its origin lie .     now , something I 've get very interested in be different kind of laughter , and we have some neurobiological evidence about how human being vocalize that suggest there might be two kind of laugh that we have . so it seem possible that the neurobiology for helpless , involuntary laughter , like my parent lie on the floor scream about a silly song , might have a different basis to it than some of that more polite social laughter that you encounter , which be not horrible laughter , but it be behavior somebody be do as part of their communicative act to you , part of their interaction with you ; they be choose to do this . in our evolution , we have develop two different way of vocalize . involuntary vocalization be part of an old system than the more voluntary vocalization like the speech I be do now . so we might imagine that laughter might actually have two different root .     so I 've be look at this in more detail . to do this , we 've have to make recording of people laugh , and we 've have to do whatever it take to make people laugh , and we get those same people to produce more pose , social laughter . so imagine your friend tell a joke , and you be laugh because you like your friend , but not really because the joke 's all that . so I be go to play you   a couple of those . I want you to tell I if you think this laughter be real laughter , or if you think it be pose . so be this involuntary laughter or more voluntary laughter ?     ( audio : laugh )     what do that sound like to you ? audience : pose . sophie scott : pose ? pose . how about this one ?     ( audio : laugh )     ( laughter )     I be the good .     ( laughter ) ( applause )     not really . no , that be helpless laughter , and in fact , to record that , all they have to do be record I watch one of my friend listen to something I know she want to laugh at , and I just start do this .     what you find be that people be good at tell the difference between real and pose laughter . they seem to be different thing to we . interestingly , you see something quite similar with chimpanzee . chimpanzee laugh differently if they be be tickle than if they be play with each other , and we might be see something like that here , involuntary laughter , tickling laughter , be different from social laughter . they be acoustically very different . the real laugh be long . they be high in pitch . when you start laugh hard , you start squeeze air out from your lung under much high pressure than you could ever produce voluntarily . for example , I could never pitch my voice that high to sing . also , you start to get these sort of contraction and weird whistling sound , all of which mean that real laughter be extremely easy , or feel extremely easy to spot .     in contrast , pose laughter , we might think it sound a bit fake . actually , it be not , it be actually an important social cue . we use it a lot , we be choose to laugh in a lot of situation , and it seem to be its own thing . so , for example , you find nasality in pose laughter , that kind of " ha ha ha ha ha " sound that you never get , you could not do , if you be laugh involuntarily . so they do seem to be genuinely these two different sort of thing .     we take it into the scanner to see how brain respond when you hear laughter . and when you do this , this be a really boring experiment . we just play people real and pose laugh . we do not tell they it be a study on laughter . we put other sound in there   to distract they , and all they be do be lie listen to sound . we do not tell they to do anything . nonetheless , when you hear real laughter and when you hear pose laughter , the brain be respond completely differently , significantly differently . what you see in the region in blue , which lie in auditory cortex , be the brain area that respond more to the real laugh , and what seem to be the case , when you hear somebody laugh involuntarily , you hear sound you would never hear in any other context . it be very unambiguous , and it seem to be associate with great auditory processing of these novel sound . in contrast , when you hear somebody laugh in a posed way , what you see be these region in pink , which be occupy brain area associate with mentalizing , think about what somebody else be think . and I think what that mean be , even if you be have your brain scan , which be completely boring and not very interesting , when you hear somebody go , " a ha ha ha ha ha , " you be try to work out why they be laugh . laughter be always meaningful . you be always try to understand it in context , even if , as far as you be concern , at that point in time , it have not necessarily anything to do with you , you still want to know why those people be laugh .     now , we 've have the opportunity to look   at how people hear real and pose laughter across the age range . so this be an online experiment we run with the royal society , and here we just ask people two question . first of all , they hear some laugh , and they have to say , how real   or pose do these laugh sound ? the real laugh be show in red and the pose laugh be show in blue . what you see be there be a rapid onset . as you get old , you get well and well at spot real laughter . so six - year - old be at chance , they can not really hear the difference . by the time you be old , you get well , but interestingly , you do not hit peak performance in this dataset until you be in your late 30 and early 40 . you do not understand laughter fully by the time you hit puberty . you do not understand laughter fully by the time your brain have mature at the end of your teen . you be learn about laughter throughout your entire early adult life .     if we turn the question around and now say not , what do the laughter sound like in term of be real or pose , but we say , how much do this laughter make you want to laugh , how contagious be this laughter to you , we see a different profile . and here , the young you be , the more you want to join in when you hear laughter . remember I laugh with my parent when I have no idea what be go on . you really can see this . now everybody , young and old , find the real laugh more contagious than the pose laugh , but as you get old , it all become   less contagious to you . now , either we be all just become really grumpy as we get old , or it may mean that as you understand laughter well , and you be get well at do that , you need more than just hear people laugh to want to laugh . you need the social stuff there .     so we 've get a very interesting behavior about which a lot of our lay assumption be incorrect , but I be come to see that actually there be even more to laughter than it be an important social emotion we should look at , because it turn out people be phenomenally nuance in term of how we use laughter . there be a really lovely set of study come out from robert levenson 's lab in california , where he be do a longitudinal study with couple . he get married couple , man and woman , into the lab , and he give they stressful conversation to have while he wire they up to a polygraph so he can see they become stress . so you 've get the two of they in there , and he 'll say to the husband , " tell I something that your wife do that irritate you . " and what you see be immediately — just run that one through your head briefly , you and your partner — you can imagine everybody get a bit more stressed as soon as that start . you can see physically , people become more stressed . what he find be that the couple who manage that feeling of stress with laughter , positive emotion like laughter , not only immediately become less stressed , they can see they physically feel well , they be deal with this unpleasant situation well together , they be also the couple that report high level of satisfaction in their relationship and they stay together for long . so in fact , when you look at close relationship , laughter be a phenomenally useful index of how people be regulate their emotion together . we be not just emit it at each other to show that we like each other , we be make ourselves feel well together .     now , I do not think this be go to be limit to romantic relationship . I think this be probably go to be a characteristic of close emotional relationship such as you might have with friend , which explain my next clip , which be of a youtube video of some young man in the former east germany on make a video to promote their heavy metal band , and it be extremely macho , and the mood be very serious , and I want you to notice what happen in term of laughter when thing go wrong and how quickly that happen , and how that change the mood .     he be cold . he be about to get wet . he be get swimming trunk on , get a towel . ice . what might possibly happen ? video start . serious mood . and his friend be already laugh . they be already laugh , hard . he be not laugh yet . ( laughter ) he be start to go now . and now they be all off . ( laughter ) they be on the floor . ( laughter )     the thing I really like about that be it be all very serious until he jump onto the ice , and as soon as he do not go through the ice , but also there be not blood and bone everywhere , his friend start laugh . and imagine if that have play he out with he stand there go , " no seriously , heinrich , I think this be break , " we would not enjoy watch that . that would be stressful . or if he be run around with a visibly broken leg laughing , and his friend be go , " heinrich , I think we need to go to the hospital now , " that also would not be funny . the fact that the laughter work , it get he from a painful , embarrassing , difficult situation , into a funny situation , into what we be   actually enjoy there , and I think that be   a really interesting use , and it be actually happen all the time .     for example , I can remember something like this happen at my father 's funeral . we be not jump around on the ice in our underpant . we be not canadian . ( laughter ) ( applause ) these event be always difficult , I have a relative who be be a bit difficult , my mum be not in a good place , and I can remember find myself just before the whole thing start tell this story about something that happen in a 1970s sitcom , and I just think at the time , I do not know why I be do this , and what I realize I be do be I be come up with something from somewhere I could use to make she laugh together with I . it be a very basic reaction to find some reason we can do this . we can laugh together . we be go to get through this . we be go to be okay .     and in fact , all of we be do this all the time . you do it so often , you do not even notice it . everybody underestimate how often they laugh , and you be do something , when you laugh with people , that be actually let you access a really ancient evolutionary system that mammal have evolve to make and maintain social bond , and clearly to regulate emotion , to make ourselves feel well . it be not something specific to human — it be a really ancient behavior which really help we regulate how we feel and make we feel well .     in other word , when it come to laughter , you and I , baby , be not nothing   but mammal . ( laughter )     thank you .     thank you . ( applause )  
   on the path that american child   travel to adulthood , two institution oversee the journey . the first be the one we hear   a lot about : college . some of you may remember the excitement that you feel when you first set off for college . some of you may be in college right now and you be feel this excitement at this very moment .     college have some shortcoming . it be expensive ; it leave young people in debt . but all in all , it be a pretty good path . young people emerge from college with pride and with great friend and with a lot of knowledge   about the world . and perhaps most importantly , a well chance in the labor market than they have before they get there .     today I want to talk about the second institution oversee the journey from childhood to adulthood in the united states . and that institution be prison . young people on this journey be meet with probation officer instead of with teacher . they be go to court date instead of to class . their junior year abroad be instead a trip to a state correctional facility . and they be emerge from their 20 not with degree in business and english , but with criminal record .     this institution be also cost we a lot , about 40,000 dollar a year to send a young person to prison in new jersey . but here , taxpayer be foot the bill and what kid be get be a cold prison cell and a permanent mark against they when they come home and apply for work .     there be more and more kid on this journey to adulthood than ever before in the united states and that be because in the past 40 year , our incarceration rate   have grow by 700 percent . I have one slide for this talk . here it be . here be our incarceration rate , about 716 people per 100,000 in the population . here be the oecd country .     what be more , it be poor kid that we be send to prison , too many draw from african - american and latino community so that prison now stand firmly between the young people try to make it and the fulfillment of the american dream . the problem 's actually   a bit bad than this 'cause we be not just send   poor kid to prison , we be saddle poor kid with court fee , with probation and parole restriction , with low - level warrant , we be ask they to live   in halfway house and on house arrest , and we be ask they   to negotiate a police force that be enter poor community of color , not for the purpose   of promote public safety , but to make arrest count , to line city coffer .     this be the hidden underside to our historic experiment in punishment : young people worry that at any moment , they will be stop , search and seize . not just in the street ,   but in their home , at school and at work .     I get interested in this   other path to adulthood when I be myself a college student attend the university of pennsylvania in the early 2000s . penn sit within a historic   african - american neighborhood . so you 've get these two parallel journey go on simultaneously : the kid attend   this elite , private university , and the kid from   the adjacent neighborhood , some of whom be make it to college , and many of whom   be be ship to prison .     in my sophomore year , I start tutor a young woman who be in high school who live about 10 minute away from the university . soon , her cousin come home   from a juvenile detention center . he be 15 , a freshman in high school . I begin to get to know he   and his friend and family , and I ask he what he think   about I write about his life for my senior thesis in college . this senior thesis become a dissertation at princeton and now a book .     by the end of my sophomore year , I move into the neighborhood and I spend the next six year     try to understand what young people be face as they come of age . the first week I spend in this neighborhood , I see two boy , five and seven year old , play this game of chase , where the old boy run after the other boy . he play the cop . when the cop catch up to the young boy , he push he down , handcuff he with imaginary handcuff , take a quarter out of   the other child 's pocket , say , " I be seize that . " he ask the child if   he be carry any drug or if he have a warrant . many time , I see this game repeat , sometimes child would   simply give up run , and stick their body flat   against the ground with their hand above their head , or flat up against a wall . child would yell at each other , " I be go to lock you up , I be go to lock you up and you be never come home ! " once I see a six - year - old child pull another child 's pant down and try to do a cavity search .     in the first 18 month that I live in this neighborhood , I write down every time I see any contact between police and people that be my neighbor . so in the first 18 month , I watch the police stop   pedestrian or people in car , search people , run people 's name , chase people through the street , pull people in for questioning , or make an arrest every single day , with five exception . fifty - two time , I watch the police break down door , chase people through house or make an arrest of someone in their home . fourteen time in this first year and a half , I watch the police punch , choke , kick , stomp on or beat young man after they have catch they .     bit by bit , I get to know two brother , chuck and tim . chuck be 18 when we meet , a senior in high school . he be play on the basketball team and make c 's and b 's . his young brother , tim , be 10 . and tim love chuck ; he follow he around a lot , look to chuck to be a mentor . they live with their mom and grandfather in a two - story row home   with a front lawn and a back porch . their mom be struggle with addiction all while the boy be grow up . she never really be able   to hold down a job for very long . it be their grandfather 's pension that support the family , not really enough to pay for food and clothe and school supply for grow boy . the family be really struggle .     so when we meet , chuck be a senior in high school . he have just turn 18 . that winter , a kid in the schoolyard call chuck 's mom a crack whore . chuck push the kid 's face into the snow and the school cop charge he   with aggravate assault . the other kid be fine the next day , I think it be his pride that be injure more than anything .     but anyway , since chuck be 18 , this agg . assault case send he   to adult county jail on state road in northeast philadelphia , where he sit , unable to pay the bail — he could not afford it — while the trial date   drag on and on and on through almost his entire senior year . finally , near the end of this season , the judge on this assault case throw out most of the charge and chuck come home with only a few hundred dollar ' worth of court fee hang over his head . tim be pretty happy that day .     the next fall , chuck try   to re - enroll as a senior , but the school secretary tell he that he be then 19 and too old   to be readmitte . then the judge on his assault case issue he a warrant for his arrest because he could not pay   the 225 dollar in court fee that come due a few week after the case end . then he be a high school dropout live on the run .     tim 's first arrest come later that year after he turn 11 . chuck have manage to get his warrant lift and he be on a payment plan for the court fee and he be drive tim to school in his girlfriend 's car . so a cop pull they over , run the car , and the car come up   as steal in california . chuck have no idea where in the history of this car it have be steal . his girlfriend 's uncle buy it from a use car auction in northeast philly . chuck and tim have never be outside of the tri - state , let alone to california . but anyway , the cop down at the precinct charge chuck with   receive steal property . and then a juvenile judge ,   a few day later , charge tim , age 11 , with accessory to receive a steal property and then he be place on   three year of probation . with this probation sentence   hang over his head ,     chuck sit his little brother down and begin teach he how to run from the police . they would sit side by side   on their back porch look out into the shared alleyway and chuck would coach tim how to spot undercover car , how to negotiate a late - night police raid , how and where to hide .     I want you to imagine for a second what chuck and tim 's life would be like if they be live in a neighborhood where kid be go to college , not prison . a neighborhood like the one   I get to grow up in . okay , you might say . but chuck and tim , kid like they , they be commit crime ! do not they deserve to be in prison ? do not they deserve to be   live in fear of arrest ? well , my answer would be no . they do not . and certainly not for the same thing   that other young people with more privilege be do with impunity . if chuck have go to my high school , that schoolyard fight   would have end there , as a schoolyard fight . it never would have become an aggravate assault case . not a single kid that I go to college with have a criminal record right now . not a single one . but can you imagine how many might have if the police have stop those kid and search their pocket for drug as they walk to class ? or have raid their frat party in the middle of the night ?     okay , you might say . but do not this high incarceration rate partly account for our   really low crime rate ? crime be down . that be a good thing . totally , that be a good thing . crime be down . it drop precipitously in the ' 90 and through the 2000s . but accord to a committee of academic convene by the national academy of science last year , the relationship between our historically high incarceration rate and our low crime rate be pretty shaky . it turn out that the crime rate go up and down irrespective of how many young people we send to prison .     we tend to think about justice in a pretty narrow way : good and bad , innocent and guilty . injustice be about be   wrongfully convict . so if you be convict   of something you do do , you should be punish for it . there be innocent and guilty people , there be victim and   there be perpetrator . maybe we could think a little bit more broadly than that .     right now , we be ask kid who live in the most disadvantaged neighborhood , who have the least amount of family resource , who be attend   the country 's bad school , who be face the tough time in the labor market , who be live in neighborhood where violence be an everyday problem , we be ask these kid to walk the thin possible line — to basically never do anything wrong .     why be we not provide support to young kid face these challenge ? why be we offer only handcuff , jail time and this fugitive existence ? can we imagine something well ?   can we imagine a criminal justice system that prioritize recovery , prevention , civic inclusion , rather than punishment ? ( applause ) a criminal justice system   that acknowledge the legacy of exclusion that poor people of color in the u.s . have face and that do not promote and perpetuate those exclusion . ( applause ) and finally , a criminal justice system that believe in black young people , rather than treat black young people   as the enemy to be round up . ( applause )     the good news be that we already be . a few year ago , michelle alexander write " the new jim crow , " which get americans to see   incarceration as a civil right issue of historic proportion in a way they have not see it before . president obama and attorney general   eric holder have come out very strongly on sentencing reform , on the need to address   racial disparity in incarceration . we be see state throw out stop and frisk as the civil right violation that it be . we be see city and state decriminalize possession of marijuana . new york , new jersey and california have be drop their   prison population , closing prison , while also see a big drop in crime . texas have get into the game now , also close prison ,   invest in education . this curious coalition be build   from the right and the left , make up of former prisoner and fiscal conservative , of civil right activist and libertarian , of young people take to the street to protest police violence against unarmed black teenager , and old , wealthy people — some of you be here in the audience — pump big money into   decarceration initiative in a deeply divide congress , the work of reform   our criminal justice system be just about the only thing that the right and the left be come together on .     I do not think I would see this political moment in my lifetime . I think many of the people who have be work tirelessly to write about the cause and consequence of our historically   high incarceration rate do not think we would see this moment in our lifetime . the question for we now be , how much can we make of it ? how much can we change ?     I want to end with a call to young people , the young people attend college and the young people struggle to stay out of prison or to make it through prison and return home . it may seem like these path to adulthood be world apart , but the young people participate in these two institution convey we to adulthood , they have one thing in common : both can be leader in the work of reform our criminal justice system . young people have always be leader in the fight for equal right , the fight for more people   to be grant dignity and a fighting chance at freedom . the mission for the generation   of young people come of age in this , a sea - change moment , potentially , be to end mass incarceration and   build a new criminal justice system , emphasis on the word justice .     thank .     ( applause )  
   I be a plant geneticist . I study gene that make plant resistant to disease and tolerant of stress . in recent year , million of people around the world have come to believe that there be something sinister about genetic modification . today , I be go to provide a different perspective .     first , let I introduce my husband , raoul . he be an organic farmer . on his farm , he plant a variety of different crop . this be one of the many ecological farming practice he use to keep his farm healthy . imagine some of the reaction we get : " really ? an organic farmer and a plant geneticist ? can you agree on anything ? "     well , we can , and it be not difficult , because we have the same goal . we want to help nourish the grow population without far destroy the environment . I believe this be the great challenge of our time .     now , genetic modification be not new ; virtually everything we eat have be genetically modify in some manner . let I give you a few example . on the left be an image of the ancient ancestor of modern corn . you see a single roll of grain that be cover in a hard case . unless you have a hammer , teosinte be not good for make tortillas . now , take a look at the ancient ancestor of banana . you can see the large seed . and unappetize brussel sprout , and eggplant , so beautiful .     now , to create these variety , breeder have use many different genetic technique over the year . some of they be quite creative , like mix two different specie together use a process call graft to create this variety that be half tomato and half potato . breeder have also use other type of genetic technique , such as random mutagenesis , which induce uncharacterized mutation into the plant . the rice in the cereal that many of we feed our baby be develop use this approach .     now , today , breeder have even more option to choose from . some of they be extraordinarily precise .     I want to give you a couple example from my own work . I work on rice , which be a staple food for more than half the world 's people . each year , 40 percent of the potential harvest be lose to pest and disease . for this reason , farmer plant rice variety that carry gene for resistance . this approach have be use for nearly 100 year . yet , when I start graduate school , no one know what these gene be . it be not until the 1990 that scientist finally uncover the genetic basis of resistance . in my laboratory , we isolate a gene for immunity to a very serious bacterial disease in asia and africa . we find we could engineer the gene into a conventional rice variety that be normally susceptible , and you can see the two leave on the bottom here be highly resistant to infection .     now , the same month that my laboratory publish our discovery on the rice immunity gene , my friend and colleague dave mackill stop by my office . he say , " seventy million rice farmer be have trouble grow rice . " that be because their field be flood , and these rice farmer be live on less than two dollar a day . although rice grow well in stand water , most rice variety will die if they be submerge for more than three day . flooding be expect to be increasingly problematic as the climate change . he tell I that his graduate student kenong xu and himself be study an ancient variety of rice that have an amazing property . it could withstand two week of complete submergence . he ask if I would be willing to help they isolate this gene . I say yes — I be very excited , because I know if we be successful , we could potentially help million of farmer grow rice even when their field be flood .     kenong spend 10 year look for this gene . then one day , he say , " come look at this experiment . you 've get to see it . " I go to the greenhouse and I see that the conventional variety that be flood for 18 day have die , but the rice variety that we have genetically engineer with a new gene we have discover , call sub1 , be alive . kenong and I be amazed and excited that a single gene could have this dramatic effect . but this be just a greenhouse experiment . would this work in the field ?     now , I be go to show you a four - month time lapse video take at the international rice research institute . breeder there develop a rice variety carry the sub1 gene use another genetic technique call precision breeding . on the left , you can see the sub1 variety , and on the right be the conventional variety . both variety do very well at first , but then the field be flood for 17 day . you can see the sub1 variety do great . in fact , it produce three and a half time more grain than the conventional variety . I love this video because it show the power of plant genetic to help farmer . last year , with the help of the bill and melinda gate foundation , three and a half million farmer grow sub1 rice .     ( applause )     thank you .     now , many people do not mind genetic modification when it come to move rice gene around , rice gene in rice plant , or even when it come to mix specie together through grafting or random mutagenesis . but when it come to take gene from virus and bacteria and put they into plant , a lot of people say , " yuck . " why would you do that ? the reason be that sometimes it be the cheap , safest , and most effective technology for enhance food security and advance sustainable agriculture . I be go to give you three example .     first , take a look at papaya . it be delicious , right ? but now , look at this papaya . this papaya be infect with papaya ringspot virus . in the 1950 , this virus nearly wipe out the entire production of papaya on the island of oahu in hawaii . many people think that the hawaiian papaya be doom , but then , a local hawaiian , a plant pathologist name dennis gonsalve , decide to try to fight this disease use genetic engineering . he take a snippet of viral dna and he insert it into the papaya genome . this be kind of like a human get a vaccination . now , take a look at his field trial . you can see the genetically engineer papaya in the center . it be immune to infection . the conventional papaya around the outside be severely infect with the virus . dennis ' pioneer work be credit with rescue the papaya industry . today , 20 year later , there be still no other method to control this disease . there be no organic method . there be no conventional method . eighty percent of hawaiian papaya be genetically engineer .     now , some of you may still feel a little queasy about viral gene in your food , but consider this : the genetically engineer papaya carry just a trace amount of the virus . if you bite into an organic or conventional papaya that be infect with the virus , you will be chew on tenfold more viral protein .     now , take a look at this pest feasting on an eggplant . the brown you see be frass , what come out the back end of the insect . to control this serious pest , which can devastate the entire eggplant crop in bangladesh , bangladeshi farmer spray insecticide two to three time a week , sometimes twice a day , when p pressure be high . but we know that some insecticide be very harmful to human health , especially when farmer and their family can not afford proper protection , like these child . in less develop country , it be estimate that 300,000 people die every year because of insecticide misuse and exposure . cornell and bangladeshi scientist decide to fight this disease use a genetic technique that build on an organic farming approach . organic farmer like my husband raoul spray an insecticide call b.t . , which be base on a bacteria . this pesticide be very specific to caterpillar pest , and in fact , it be nontoxic to human , fish and bird . it be less toxic than table salt . but this approach do not work well in bangladesh . that be because these insecticide spray be difficult to find , they be expensive , and they do not prevent the insect from get inside the plant . in the genetic approach , scientist cut the gene out of the bacteria and insert it directly into the eggplant genome . will this work to reduce insecticide spray in bangladesh ? definitely . last season , farmer report they be able to reduce their insecticide use by a huge amount , almost down to zero . they be able to harvest and replant for the next season .     now , I 've give you a couple example of how genetic engineering can be use to fight pest and disease and to reduce the amount of insecticide . my final example be an example where genetic engineering can be use to reduce malnutrition . in less develop country , 500,000 child go blind every year because of lack of vitamin a. more than half will die . for this reason , scientist support by the rockefeller foundation genetically engineer a golden rice to produce beta - carotene , which be the precursor of vitamin a. this be the same pigment that we find in carrot . researcher estimate that just one cup of golden rice per day will save the life of thousand of child . but golden rice be virulently oppose by activist who be against genetic modification . just last year , activist invade and destroy a field trial in the philippines . when I hear about the destruction , I wonder if they know that they be destroy much more than a scientific research project , that they be destroy medicine that child desperately need to save their sight and their life .     some of my friend and family still worry : how do you know gene in the food be safe to eat ? I explain the genetic engineering , the process of move gene between specie , have be use for more than 40 year in wine , in medicine , in plant , in cheese . in all that time , there have not be a single case of harm to human health or the environment . but I say , look , I be not ask you to believe I . science be not a belief system . my opinion do not matter . let us look at the evidence . after 20 year of careful study and rigorous peer review by thousand of independent scientist , every major scientific organization in the world have conclude that the crop currently on the market be safe to eat and that the process of genetic engineering be no more risky than old method of genetic modification . these be precisely the same organization that most of we trust when it come to other important scientific issue such as global climate change or the safety of vaccine .     raoul and I believe that , instead of worry about the gene in our food , we must focus on how we can help child grow up healthy . we must ask if farmer in rural community can thrive , and if everyone can afford the food . we must try to minimize environmental degradation . what scare I most about the loud argument and misinformation about plant genetic be that the poor people who most need the technology may be deny access because of the vague fear and prejudice of those who have enough to eat .     we have a huge challenge in front of we . let us celebrate scientific innovation and use it . it be our responsibility to do everything we can to help alleviate human suffering and safeguard the environment .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     chris anderson : powerfully argue . the people who argue against gmos , as I understand it , the core piece come from two thing . one , complexity and unintended consequence . nature be this incredibly complex machine . if we put out these brand new gene that we 've create , that have not be challenge by year of evolution , and they start mix up with the rest of what be go on , could not that trigger some kind of cataclysm or problem , especially when you add in the commercial incentive that some company have to put they out there ? the fear be that those incentive mean that the decision be not make on purely scientific ground , and even if it be , that there would be unintended consequence . how do we know that there be not a big risk of some unintended consequence ? often our tinkering with nature do lead to big , unintended consequence and chain reaction .     pamela ronald : okay , so on the commercial aspect , one thing that be really important to understand be that , in the developed world , farmer in the united states , almost all farmer , whether they be organic or conventional , they buy seed produce by seed company . so there be definitely a commercial interest to sell a lot of seed , but hopefully they be sell seed that the farmer want to buy . it be different in the less developed world . farmer there can not afford the seed . these seed be not be sell . these seed be be distribute freely through traditional kind of certification group , so it be very important in less developed country that the seed be freely available .     can : would not some activist say that this be actually part of the conspiracy ? this be the heroin strategy . you seed the stuff , and people have no choice but to be hook on these seed forever ?     pr : there be a lot of conspiracy theory for sure , but it do not work that way . for example , the seed that be be distribute , the flood - tolerant rice , this be distribute freely through indian and bangladeshi seed certification agency , so there be no commercial interest at all . the golden rice be develop through support of the rockefeller foundation . again , it be be freely distribute . there be no commercial profit in this situation . and now to address your other question about , well , mix gene , be not there some unintended consequence ? absolutely — every time we do something different , there be an unintended consequence , but one of the point I be try to make be that we 've be do kind of crazy thing to our plant , mutagenesis use radiation or chemical mutagenesis . this induce thousand of uncharacterized mutation , and this be even a high risk of unintended consequence than many of the modern method . and so it be really important not to use the term gmo because it be scientifically meaningless . I feel it be very important to talk about a specific crop and a specific product , and think about the need of the consumer .     can : so part of what be happen here be that there be a mental model in a lot of people that nature be nature , and it be pure and pristine , and to tinker with it be frankensteinian . it be make something that be pure dangerous in some way , and I think you be say that that whole model just misunderstand how nature be . nature be a much more chaotic interplay of genetic change that have be happen all the time anyway .     pr : that be absolutely true , and there be no such thing as pure food . I mean , you could not spray eggplant with insecticide or not genetically engineer it , but then you would be stick eat frass . so there be no purity there .     can : pam ronald , thank you .   that be powerfully argue . pr : thank you very much . I appreciate it . ( applause )  
   in june of 1998 , tori murden mcclure leave nag head , north carolina for france .     that be her boat , the american pearl . it be 23 foot long and just six foot across at its widest point . the deck be the size of a cargo bed of a ford f-150 pickup truck . tori and her friend build it by hand , and it weigh about 1,800 pound . her plan be to row it alone across the atlantic ocean — no motor , no sail — something no woman and no american have ever do before . this would be her route : over 3,600 mile across the open north atlantic ocean .     professionally , tori work as a project administrator for the city of louisville , kentucky , her hometown , but her real passion be explore . this be not her first big expedition . several year early , she would become the first woman to ski to the south pole . she be an accomplished rower in college , even compete for a spot on the 1992 u.s . olympic team , but this , this be different .     ( video ) ( music ) tori murden mcclure : hi . it be sunday , july 5 . sector time 9 a.m. so that be kentucky time now .     dawn lande : tori make these video as she row . this be her 21st day at sea . at this point , she would cover over 1,000 mile , have have no radio contact in more than two week follow a storm that disable all her long - range communication system just five day in . most day look like this . at this point , she would row over 200,000 stroke , fight the current and the wind . some day , she travel as little as 15 foot . yeah . and as frustrating as those day be , other day be like this .     ( video ) tmm : and I want to show you my little friend .     dl : she see fish , dolphin , whale , shark , and even some sea turtle . after two week with no human contact , tori be able to contact a local cargo ship via vhf radio .     ( video ) tmm : do you guy have a weather report , over ?     man : head up to a low ahead of you but it be head , and you be obviously go northeast and there be a high behind we . that would be come east - northeast also .     tmm : good .     dl : she be pretty happy to talk to another human at this point .     ( video ) tmm : so weather report say nothing dramatic be go to happen soon .     dl : what the weather report do not tell she be that she be row right into the path of hurricane danielle in the bad hurricane season on record in the north atlantic .     ( video ) tmm : just sprain my ankle . there be a very strong wind from the east now . it be blow about . it be blow ! after 12 day of storm I get to row for four hour without a flagging wind . I be not very happy right now . as happy as I be this morning , I be unhappy now , so ...     dl : after nearly three month at sea , she would cover over 3,000 mile . she be two third of the way there , but in the storm , the wave be the size of a seven - story building . her boat keep capsize . some of they be pitchpole capsize , flip her end over end , and rowing become impossible .     ( video ) tmm : it be 6:30 a.m. I be in something big , bad and ugly . two capsize . last capsize , I take the rib off the top of my ceiling with my back . I 've have about six capsize now . the last one be a pitchpole . I have the argus beacon with I . I would set off the distress signal , but quite frankly , I do not think they would ever be able to find this little boat . it be so far underwater right now , the only part that be show pretty much be the cabin . it be about 10 a.m. I 've lose track of the number of capsize . I seem to capsize about every 15 minute . I think I may have break my left arm . the wave be tear the boat to shred . I keep pray because I be not sure I be go to make it through this . dl : tori set off her distress beacon and be rescue by a pass container ship . they find her abandon boat two month later adrift near france . I read about it in the newspaper .     in 1998 , I be a high school student live in louisville , kentucky . now , I live in new york city . I be a songwriter . and her bravery stick with I , and I be adapt her story into a musical call " row . " when tori return home , she be feel dishearten , she be break . she be have a hard time make the transition back into civilization .     in this scene , she sit at home . the phone be ring , her friend be call , but she do not know how to talk to they . she sing this song . it be call " dear heart . "     ( guitar )     when I be dream ,     I take my body     to beautiful place     I would never be .     I see gibraltar ,     and star of kentucky     burn in the moonlight ,     make I smile .     and when I awake here ,     the sky be so cloudy .     I walk to a party     where people I know     try hard to know I     and ask where I 've be ,     but I can not explain     what I 've see to they .     ah , listen , dear heart .     just pay attention ,     go right from the start .     ah , listen , dear heart .     you can fall off the map ,     but do not fall apart .     ooh ooh ooh ,     ah ah ah ah ah .     ah ah ,     ah ah ah .     when I be out there ,     the ocean would hold I ,     rock I and throw I ,     light as a child .     but now I be so heavy ,     nothing console I .     my mind float like driftwood ,     wayward and wild .     ah , listen , dear heart .     just pay attention ,     go right from the start .     ah , listen , dear heart .     you can fall off the map ,     but do not fall apart .     ooh .     eventually , tori start to get her foot under she . she start hang out with her friend again . she meet a guy and fall in love for the first time . she get a new job work for another louisville native , muhammad ali . one day , at lunch with her new boss , tori share the news that two other woman be set out to row across the mid - atlantic , to do something that she almost die try to do .     his response be classic ali : " you do not want to go through life as the woman who almost row across the ocean . "     he be right . tori rebuild the american pearl , and in december of 1999 , she do it .     ( applause ) ( guitar )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   when I be nine year old , my mom ask I what I would want my house to look like , and I draw this fairy mushroom . and then she actually build it . ( laughter )     I do not think I realize this be so unusual at the time , and maybe I still have not , because I be still design house . this be a six - story bespoke home on the island of bali . it be build almost entirely from bamboo . the living room overlook the valley from the fourth floor . you enter the house by a bridge . it can get hot in the tropic , so we make big curve roof to catch the breeze . but some room have tall window to keep the air conditioning in and the bug out . this room we leave open . we make an air - condition , tent bed . and one client want a tv room in the corner of her living room . box off an area with tall wall just do not feel right , so instead , we make this giant woven pod .     now , we do have all the necessary luxury , like bathroom . this one be a basket in the corner of the living room , and I 've got tell you , some people actually hesitate to use it . we have not quite figured out our acoustic insulation . ( laughter ) so there be lot of thing that we be still work on , but one thing I have learn   be that bamboo will treat you well if you use it right .     it be actually a wild grass . it grow on otherwise unproductive land — deep ravine , mountainside . it live off of rainwater , spring water , sunlight , and of the 1,450 specie of bamboo that grow across the world , we use just seven of they .     that be my dad . he be the one who get I build with bamboo , and he be stand in a clump of dendrocalamus asper niger that he plant just seven year ago . each year , it send up a new generation of shoot . that shoot , we watch it grow a meter in three day just last week , so we be talk about sustainable timber in three year .     now , we harvest from hundred of family - own clump . betung , as we call it , it be really long , up to 18 meter of usable length . try get that truck down the mountain . and it be strong : it have the tensile strength of steel , the compressive strength of concrete . slam four ton straight down on a pole , and it can take it . because it be hollow , it be lightweight , light enough to be lift by just a few man , or , apparently , one woman .     ( laughter ) ( applause )     and when my father build green school in bali , he choose bamboo for all of the building on campus , because he see it as a promise . it be a promise to the kid . it be one sustainable material that they will not run out of . and when I first see these structure under construction about six year ago , I just think , this make perfect sense . it be grow all around we . it be strong . it be elegant . it be earthquake - resistant . why have not this happen soon , and what can we do with it next ?     so along with some of the original builder of green school , I found ibuku . ibu mean " mother , " and ku mean " mine , " so it represent my mother earth , and at ibuku , we be a team of artisan , architect and designer , and what we be do together be create a new way of building . over the past five year together , we have build over 50 unique structure , most of they in bali . nine of they be at green village — you 've just see inside some of these home — and we fill they with bespoke furniture , we surround they with veggie gardens , we would love to invite you all to come visit someday . and while you be there , you can also see green school — we keep build classroom there each year — as well as an update fairy mushroom house .     we be also work on a little house for export . this be a traditional sumbanese home that we replicate , right down to the detail and textile . a restaurant with an open - air kitchen . it look a lot like a kitchen , right ? and a bridge that span 22 meter across a river .     now , what we be do , it be not entirely new . from little hut to elaborate bridge like this one in java , bamboo have be in use across the tropical region of the world for literally ten of thousand of year . there be island and even continent that be first reach by bamboo raft . but until recently , it be almost impossible to reliably protect bamboo from insect , and so , just about everything that be ever build out of bamboo be go . unprotected bamboo weather . untreated bamboo gets eat to dust . and so that be why most people , especially in asia , think that you could not be poor enough or rural enough to actually want to live in a bamboo house .     and so we think , what will it take to change their mind , to convince people that bamboo be worth build with , much less worth aspire to ?     first , we need safe treatment solution . borax be a natural salt . it turn bamboo into a viable building material . treat it properly , design it carefully , and a bamboo structure can last a lifetime .     second , build something extraordinary out of it . inspire people . fortunately , balinese culture foster craftsmanship . it value the artisan . so combine those with the adventurous outlier from new generation of locally train architect and designer and engineer , and always remember that you be design for curving , tapering , hollow pole . no two pole alike , no straight line , no two - by - four here . the try - and - true , well - craft formula and vocabulary of architecture do not apply here . we have have to invent our own rule . we ask the bamboo what it be good at , what it want to become , and what it say be : respect it , design for its strength , protect it from water , and to make the most of its curve .     so we design in real 3d , make scale structural model out of the same material that we 'll later use to build the house . and bamboo model - making , it be an art , as well as some hardcore engineering .     so that be the blueprint of the house .     ( laughter )     and we bring it to site , and with tiny ruler , we measure each pole , and consider each curve , and we choose a piece of bamboo from the pile to replicate that house on site .     when it come down to the detail , we consider everything . why be door so often rectangular ? why not round ? how could you make a door well ? well , its hinge battle with gravity , and gravity will always win in the end , so why not have it pivot on the center where it can stay balanced ? and while you be at it , why not door shape like teardrop ?     to reap the selective benefit and work within the constraint of this material , we have really have to push ourselves , and within that constraint , we have find space for something new . it be a challenge : how do you make a ceiling if you do not have any flat board to work with ? let I tell you , sometimes I dream of sheet rock and plywood . ( laughter ) but if what you 've get be skilled craftsman and itsy bitsy little split , weave that ceiling together , stretch a canvas over it , lacquer it . how do you design durable kitchen countertop that do justice to this curving structure you 've just build ? slice up a boulder like a loaf of bread , hand - carve each to fit the other , leave the crust on , and what we be do , it be almost entirely handmade . the structural connection of our building be reinforce by steel joint , but we use a lot of hand - whittle bamboo pin . there be thousand of pin in each floor . this floor be make of glossy and durable bamboo skin . you can feel the texture under bare foot .     and the floor that you walk on , can it affect the way that you walk ? can it change the footprint that you 'll ultimately leave on the world ? I remember be nine year old and feel wonder , and possibility , and a little bit of idealism . and we 've get a really long way to go , there be a lot leave to learn , but one thing I know be that with creativity and commitment , you can create beauty and comfort and safety and even luxury out of a material that will grow back .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   chris anderson : so I guess what we be go to do be we be go to talk about your life , and use some picture that you share with I . and I think we should start right here with this one . okay , now who be this ?     martine rothblatt : this be I with our old son eli . he be about age five . this be take in nigeria right after having take the washington , d.c . bar exam .     can : okay . but this do not really look like a martine .     mr : right . that be myself as a male , the way I be bring up . before I transition from male to female and martin to martine .     can : you be bring up martin rothblatt .     mr : correct .     can : and about a year after this picture , you marry a beautiful woman . be this love at first sight ? what happen there ?     mr : it be love at the first sight . I see bina at a discotheque in los angeles , and we later begin live together , but the moment I see she , I see just an aura of energy around she . I ask she to dance . she say she see an aura of energy around I . I be a single male parent . she be a single female parent . we show each other our kid ' picture , and we 've be happily marry for a third of a century now . ( applause )     can : and at the time , you be kind of this hotshot entrepreneur , work with satellite . I think you have two successful company , and then you start address this problem of how could you use satellite to revolutionize radio . tell we about that .     mr : right . I always love space technology , and satellite , to I , be sort of like the canoe that our ancestor first push out into the water . so it be exciting for I to be part of the navigation of the ocean of the sky , and as I develop different type of satellite communication system , the main thing I do be to launch big and more powerful satellite , the consequence of which be that the receive antenna could be small and small , and after go through direct television broadcasting , I have the idea that if we could make a more powerful satellite , the receiving dish could be so small that it would just be a section of a parabolic dish , a flat little plate embed into the roof of an automobile , and it would be possible to have nationwide satellite radio , and that be sirius xm today .     can : wow . so who here have use sirius ?     ( applause )     mr : thank you for your monthly subscription .     ( laughter )     can : so that succeed despite all prediction at the time . it be a huge commercial success , but soon after this , in the early 1990 , there be this big transition in your life and you become martine .     mr : correct . can : so tell I , how do that happen ? mr : it happen in consultation with bina and our four beautiful child , and I discuss with each of they that I feel my soul be always female , and as a woman , but I be afraid people would laugh at I if I express it , so I always keep it bottle up and just show my male side . and each of they have a different take on this . bina say , " I love your soul , and whether the outside be martin and martine , it do not it matter to I , I love your soul . " my son say , " if you become a woman , will you still be my father ? " and I say , " yes , I 'll always be your father , " and I be still his father today . my young daughter do an absolutely brilliant five - year - old thing . she tell people , " I love my dad and she love I . " so she have no problem with a gender blending whatsoever .     can : and a couple year after this , you publish this book : " the apartheid of sex . " what be your thesis in this book ?     mr : my thesis in this book be that there be seven billion people in the world , and actually , seven billion unique way to express one 's gender . and while people may have the genital of a male or a female , the genital do not determine your gender or even really your sexual identity . that be just a matter of anatomy and reproductive tract , and people could choose whatever gender they want if they be not force by society into category of either male or female the way south africa use to force people into category of black or white . we know from anthropological science that race be fiction , even though racism be very , very real , and we now know from cultural study that separate male or female gender be a construct fiction . the reality be a gender fluidity that cross the entire continuum from male to female .     can : you yourself do not always feel 100 percent female .     mr : correct . I would say in some way I change my gender about as often as I change my hairstyle .     can : ( laugh ) okay , now , this be your gorgeous daughter , jenesis . and I guess she be about this age when something pretty terrible happen .     mr : yes , she be find herself unable to walk up the stair in our house to her bedroom , and after several month of doctor , she be diagnose to have a rare , almost invariably fatal disease call pulmonary arterial hypertension .     can : so how do you respond to that ?     mr : well , we first try to get she to the good doctor we could . we end up at child 's national medical center in washington , d.c . the head of pediatric cardiology tell we that he be go to refer she to get a lung transplant , but not to hold out any hope , because there be very few lung available , especially for child . he say that all people with this illness die , and if any of you have see the film " lorenzo 's oil , " there be a scene when the protagonist kind of roll down the stairway cry and bemoan the fate of his son , and that be exactly how we feel about jenesis .     can : but you do not accept that as the limit of what you could do . you start try to research and see if you could find a cure somehow .     mr : correct . she be in the intensive care ward for week at a time , and bina and I would tag team to stay at the hospital while the other watch the rest of the kid , and when I be in the hospital and she be sleep , I go to the hospital library . I read every article that I could find on pulmonary hypertension . I have not take any biology , even in college , so I have to go from a biology textbook to a college - level textbook and then medical textbook and the journal article , back and forth , and eventually I know enough to think that it might be possible that somebody could find a cure . so we start a nonprofit foundation . I write a description ask people to submit grant and we would pay for medical research . I become an expert on the condition — doctor say to I , martine , we really appreciate all the funding you 've provide we , but we be not go to be able to find a cure in time to save your daughter . however , there be a medicine that be develop at the burroughs wellcome company that could halt the progression of the disease , but burrough wellcome have just be acquire by glaxo wellcome . they make a decision not to develop any medicine for rare and orphan disease , and maybe you could use your expertise in satellite communication to develop this cure for pulmonary hypertension .     can : so how on earth do you get access to this drug ?     mr : I go to glaxo wellcome and after three time be reject and have the door slam in my face because they be not go to out - license the drug to a satellite communication expert , they be not go to send the drug out to anybody at all , and they think I do not have the expertise , finally I be able to persuade a small team of people to work with I and develop enough credibility . I wear down their resistance , and they have no hope this drug would even work , by the way , and they try to tell I , " you be just waste your time . we be sorry about your daughter . " but finally , for 25,000 dollar and agreement to pay 10 percent of any revenue we might ever get , they agree to give I worldwide right to this drug .     can : and so you put this drug on the market in a really brilliant way , by basically charge what it would take to make the economic work .     mr : oh yes , chris , but this really be not a drug that I end up — after I write the check for 25,000 , and I say , " okay , where be the medicine for jenesis ? " they say , " oh , martine , there be no medicine for jenesis . this be just something we try in rat . " and they give I , like , a little plastic ziploc bag of a small amount of powder . they say , " do not give it to any human , " and they give I a piece of paper which say it be a patent , and from that , we have to figure out a way to make this medicine . a hundred chemist in the u.s . at the top university all swear that little patent could never be turn into a medicine . if it be turn into a medicine , it could never be deliver because it have a half - life of only 45 minute .     can : and yet , a year or two later , you be there with a medicine that work for jenesis .     mr : chris , the astonishing thing be that this absolutely worthless piece of powder that have the sparkle of a promise of hope for jenesis be not only keep jenesis and other people alive today , but produce almost a billion and a half dollar a year in revenue .     ( applause )     can : so here you go . so you take this company public , right ? and make an absolute fortune . and how much have you pay glaxo , by the way , after that 25,000 ?     mr : yeah , well , every year we pay they 10 percent of 1.5 billion , 150 million dollar , last year 100 million dollar . it be the good return on investment they ever receive . ( laughter )     can : and the good news of all , I guess , be this .     mr : yes . jenesis be an absolutely brilliant young lady . she be alive , healthy today at 30 . you see I , bina and jenesis there . the most amazing thing about jenesis be that while she could do anything with her life , and believe I , if you grow up your whole life with people in your face say that you 've get a fatal disease , I would probably run to tahiti and just not want to run into anybody again . but instead she choose to work in united therapeutic . she say she want to do all she can to help other people with orphan disease get medicine , and today , she be our project leader for all telepresence activity , where she helps digitally unite the entire company to work together to find cure for pulmonary hypertension .     can : but not everyone who have this disease have be so fortunate . there be still many people die , and you be tackle that too . how ?     mr : exactly , chris . there be some 3,000 people a year in the united states alone , perhaps 10 time that number worldwide , who continue to die of this illness because the medicine slow down the progression but they do not halt it . the only cure for pulmonary hypertension , pulmonary fibrosis , cystic fibrosis , emphysema , copd , what leonard nimoy just die of , be a lung transplant , but sadly , there be only enough available lung for 2,000 people in the u.s . a year to get a lung transplant , whereas nearly a half million people a year die of end - stage lung failure . can : so how can you address that ? mr : so I conceptualize the possibility that just like we keep car and plane and building go forever with an unlimited supply of build part and machine part , why can not we create an unlimited supply of transplantable organ to keep people live indefinitely , and especially people with lung disease . so we 've team up with the decoder of the human genome , craig venter , and the company he found with peter diamandis , the founder of the x prize , to genetically modify the pig genome so that the pig 's organ will not be reject by the human body and thereby to create an unlimited supply of transplantable organ . we do this through our company , united therapeutics .     can : so you really believe that within , what , a decade , that this shortage of transplantable lung maybe be cure , through these guy ?     mr : absolutely , chris . I be as certain of that as I be of the success that we 've have with direct television broadcasting , sirius xm . it be actually not rocket science . it be straightforward engineering away one gene after another . we be so lucky to be bear in the time that sequence genome be a routine activity , and the brilliant folk at synthetic genomic be able to zero in on the pig genome , find exactly the gene that be problematic , and fix they .     can : but it be not just body that — though that be amazing . ( applause ) it be not just long - last body that be of interest to you now . it be long - last mind . and I think this graph for you say something quite profound . what do this mean ?     mr : what this graph mean , and it come from ray kurzweil , be that the rate of development in computer processing hardware , firmware and software , have be advance along a curve such that by the 2020 , as we see in early presentation today , there will be information technology that process information and the world around we at the same rate as a human mind .     can : and so that be so , you be actually get ready for this world by believe that we will soon be able to , what , actually take the content of our brain and somehow preserve they forever ? how do you describe that ?     mr : well , chris , what we be work on be create a situation where people can create a mind file , and a mind file be the collection of their mannerism , personality , recollection , feeling , belief , attitude and value , everything that we 've pour today into google , into amazon , into facebook , and all of this information store there will be able , in the next couple decade , once software be able to recapitulate consciousness , be able to revive the consciousness which be imminent in our mind file .     can : now you be not just mess around with this . you be serious . I mean , who be this ?     mr : this be a robot version of my beloved spouse , bina . and we call her bina 48 . she be program by hanson robotic out of texas . there be the centerfold from national geographic magazine with one of her caregiver , and she roam the web and have hundred of hour of bina 's mannerism , personality . she be kind of like a two - year - old kid , but she say thing that blow people away , well express by perhaps a new york times pulitzer prize - win journalist amy harmon who say her answer be often frustrating , but other time as compelling as those of any flesh person she be interview .     can : and be your thinking here , part of your hope here , be that this version of bina can in a sense live on forever , or some future upgrade to this version can live on forever ? mr : yes . not just bina , but everybody . you know , it cost we virtually nothing to store our mind file on facebook , instagram , what - have - you . social medium be I think one of the most extraordinary invention of our time , and as app become available that will allow we to out - siri siri , well and well , and develop consciousness operating system , everybody in the world , billion of people , will be able to develop mind clone of themselves that will have their own life on the web .     can : so the thing be , martine , that in any normal conversation , this would sound stark - stare mad , but in the context of your life , what you 've do , some of the thing we 've hear this week , the construct reality that our mind give , I mean , you would not bet against it .     mr : well , I think it be really nothing come from I . if anything , I be perhaps a bit of a communicator of activity that be be undertake by the great company in china , japan , india , the u.s . , europe . there be ten of million of people work on write code that express more and more aspect of our human consciousness , and you do not have to be a genius to see that all these thread be go to come together and ultimately create human consciousness , and it be something we 'll value . there be so many thing to do in this life , and if we could have a simulacrum , a digital doppelgänger of ourselves that help we process book , do shopping , be our good friend , I believe our mind clone , these digital version of ourselves , will ultimately be our good friend , and for I personally and bina personally , we love each other like crazy . each day , we be always say , like , " wow , I love you even more than 30 year ago . and so for we , the prospect of mind clone and regenerated body be that our love affair , chris , can go on forever . and we never get bored of each other . I be sure we never will .     can : I think bina 's here , right ? mr : she be , yeah . can : would it be too much , I do not know , do we have a handheld mic ? bina , could we invite you to the stage ? I just have to ask you one question . besides , we need to see you .     ( applause )     thank you , thank you . come and join martine here . I mean , look , when you got marry , if someone have tell you that , in a few year time , the man you be marry would become a woman , and a few year after that , you would become a robot — ( laughter ) — how have this go ? how have it be ?     bina rothblatt : it be be really an exciting journey , and I would have never think that at the time , but we start make goal and set those goal and accomplish thing , and before you know it , we just keep go up and up and we be still not stop , so it be great .     can : martine tell I something really beautiful , just actually on skype before this , which be that he want to live for hundred of year as a mind file , but not if it be not with you .     br : that be right , we want to do it together . we be cryonicist as well , and we want to wake up together .     can : so just so as you know , from my point of view , this be not only one of the most astonishing life I have hear , it be one of the most astonishing love story I 've ever hear . it be just a delight to have you both here at ted . thank you so much .     mr : thank you .     ( applause )  
   why do we cheat ? and why do happy people cheat ? and when we say " infidelity , " what exactly do we mean ? be it a hookup , a love story , pay sex , a chat room , a massage with a happy ending ? why do we think that man cheat out of boredom and fear of intimacy , but woman cheat out of loneliness and hunger for intimacy ? and be an affair always the end of a relationship ?     for the past 10 year , I have travel the globe and work extensively with hundred of couple who have be shatter by infidelity . there be one simple act of transgression that can rob a couple of their relationship , their happiness and their very identity : an affair . and yet , this extremely common act be so poorly understand . so this talk be for anyone who have ever love .     adultery have exist since marriage be invent , and so , too , the taboo against it . in fact , infidelity have a tenacity that marriage can only envy , so much so , that this be the only commandment that be repeat twice in the bible : once for do it , and once just for think about it . ( laughter ) so how do we reconcile what be universally forbid , yet universally practice ?     now , throughout history , man practically have a license to cheat with little consequence , and support by a host of biological and evolutionary theory that justify their need to roam , so the double standard be as old as adultery itself . but who know what be really go on under the sheet there , right ? because when it come to sex , the pressure for man be to boast and to exaggerate , but the pressure for woman be to hide , minimize and deny , which be not surprising when you consider that there be still nine country where woman can be kill for stray .     now , monogamy use to be one person for life . today , monogamy be one person at a time . ( laughter ) ( applause )     I mean , many of you probably have say , " I be monogamous in all my relationship . " ( laughter )     we use to marry , and have sex for the first time . but now we marry , and we stop have sex with other . the fact be that monogamy have nothing to do with love . man rely on woman 's fidelity in order to know whose child these be , and who get the cow when I die .     now , everyone want to know what percentage of people cheat . I 've be ask that question since I arrive at this conference . ( laughter ) it apply to you . but the definition of infidelity keep on expand : sexte , watch porn , stay secretly active on date app . so because there be no universally agree - upon definition of what even constitute an infidelity , estimate vary widely , from 26 percent to 75 percent . but on top of it , we be walk contradiction . so 95 percent of we will say that it be terribly wrong for our partner to lie about have an affair , but just about the same amount of we will say that that be exactly what we would do if we be have one . ( laughter )     now , I like this definition of an affair — it bring together the three key element : a secretive relationship , which be the core structure of an affair ; an emotional connection to one degree or another ; and a sexual alchemy . and alchemy be the key word here , because the erotic frisson be such that the kiss that you only imagine giving , can be as powerful and as enchant as hour of actual lovemaking . as marcel proust say , it be our imagination that be responsible for love , not the other person .     so it be never be easy to cheat , and it be never be more difficult to keep a secret . and never have infidelity exact such a psychological toll . when marriage be an economic enterprise , infidelity threaten our economic security . but now that marriage be a romantic arrangement , infidelity threaten our emotional security . ironically , we use to turn to adultery — that be the space where we seek pure love . but now that we seek love in marriage , adultery destroy it .     now , there be three way that I think infidelity hurt differently today . we have a romantic ideal in which we turn to one person to fulfill an endless list of need : to be my great lover , my good friend , the good parent , my trust confidant , my emotional companion , my intellectual equal . and I be it : I be choose , I be unique , I be indispensable , I be irreplaceable , I be the one . and infidelity tell I I be not . it be the ultimate betrayal . infidelity shatter the grand ambition of love . but if throughout history , infidelity have always be painful , today it be often traumatic , because it threaten our sense of self .     so my patient fernando , he be plague . he go on : " I think I know my life . I think I know who you be , who we be as a couple , who I be . now , I question everything . " infidelity — a violation of trust , a crisis of identity . " can I ever trust you again ? " he ask . " can I ever trust anyone again ? "     and this be also what my patient heather be tell I , when she be talk to I about her story with nick . married , two kid . nick just leave on a business trip , and heather be play on his ipad with the boy , when she see a message appear on the screen : " can not wait to see you . " strange , she think , we just see each other . and then another message : " can not wait to hold you in my arm . " and heather realize these be not for she . she also tell I that her father have affair , but her mother , she find one little receipt in the pocket , and a little bit of lipstick on the collar . heather , she go dig , and she find hundred of message , and photo exchange and desire express . the vivid detail of nick 's two - year affair unfold in front of she in real time , and it make I think : affair in the digital age be death by a thousand cut .     but then we have another paradox that we be deal with these day . because of this romantic ideal , we be rely on our partner 's fidelity with a unique fervor . but we also have never be more inclined to stray , and not because we have new desire today , but because we live in an era where we feel that we be entitle to pursue our desire , because this be the culture where I deserve to be happy . and if we use to divorce because we be unhappy , today we divorce because we could be happy . and if divorce carry all the shame , today , choose to stay when you can leave be the new shame . so heather , she can not talk to her friend because she be afraid that they will judge she for still love nick , and everywhere she turn , she get the same advice : leave he . throw the dog on the curb . and if the situation be reverse , nick would be in the same situation . stay be the new shame .     so if we can divorce , why do we still have affair ? now , the typical assumption be that if someone cheat , either there be something wrong in your relationship or wrong with you . but million of people can not all be pathological . the logic go like this : if you have everything you need at home , then there be no need to go look elsewhere , assume that there be such a thing as a perfect marriage that will inoculate we against wanderlust . but what if passion have a finite shelf life ? what if there be thing that even a good relationship can never provide ? if even happy people cheat , what be it about ?     the vast majority of people that I actually work with be not at all chronic philanderer . they be often people who be deeply monogamous in their belief , and at least for their partner . but they find themselves in a conflict between their value and their behavior . they often be people who have actually be faithful for decade , but one day they cross a line that they never think they would cross , and at the risk of lose everything . but for a glimmer of what ? affair be an act of betrayal , and they be also an expression of longing and loss . at the heart of an affair , you will often find a longing and a yearning for an emotional connection , for novelty , for freedom , for autonomy , for sexual intensity , a wish to recapture lose part of ourselves or an attempt to bring back vitality in the face of loss and tragedy .     I be think about another patient of mine , priya , who be blissfully married , love her husband , and would never want to hurt the man . but she also tell I that she be always do what be expect of she : good girl , good wife , good mother , take care of her immigrant parent . priya , she fall for the arborist who remove the tree from her yard after hurricane sandy . and with his truck and his tattoo , he be quite the opposite of she . but at 47 , priya 's affair be about the adolescence that she never have . and her story highlight for I that when we seek the gaze of another , it be not always our partner that we be turn away from , but the person that we have ourselves become . and it be not so much that we be look for another person , as much as we be look for another self .     now , all over the world , there be one word that people who have affair always tell I . they feel alive . and they often will tell I story of recent loss — of a parent who die , and a friend that go too soon , and bad news at the doctor . death and mortality often live in the shadow of an affair , because they raise these question . be this it ? be there more ? be I go on for another 25 year like this ? will I ever feel that thing again ? and it have lead I to think that perhaps these question be the one that propel people to cross the line , and that some affair be an attempt to beat back deadness , in an antidote to death .     and contrary to what you may think , affair be way less about sex , and a lot more about desire : desire for attention , desire to feel special , desire to feel important . and the very structure of an affair , the fact that you can never have your lover , keep you want . that in itself be a desire machine , because the incompleteness , the ambiguity , keeps you want that which you can not have .     now some of you probably think that affair do not happen in open relationship , but they do . first of all , the conversation about monogamy be not the same as the conversation about infidelity . but the fact be that it seem that even when we have the freedom to have other sexual partner , we still seem to be lure by the power of the forbidden , that if we do that which we be not suppose to do , then we feel like we be really do what we want to . and I 've also tell quite a few of my patient that if they could bring into their relationship one tenth of the boldness , the imagination and the verve that they put into their affair , they probably would never need to see I . ( laughter )     so how do we heal from an affair ? desire run deep . betrayal run deep . but it can be heal . and some affair be death knell for relationship that be already die on the vine . but other will jolt we into new possibility . the fact be , the majority of couple who have experience affair stay together . but some of they will merely survive , and other will actually be able to turn a crisis into an opportunity . they 'll be able to turn this into a generative experience . and I be actually think even more so for the deceive partner , who will often say , " you think I do not want more ? but I be not the one who do it . " but now that the affair be expose , they , too , get to claim more , and they no long have to uphold the status quo that may not have be work for they that well , either .     I 've notice that a lot of couple , in the immediate aftermath of an affair , because of this new disorder that may actually lead to a new order , will have depth of conversation with honesty and openness that they have not have in decade . and , partner who be sexually indifferent find themselves suddenly so lustfully voracious , they do not know where it be come from . something about the fear of loss will rekindle desire , and make way for an entirely new kind of truth .     so when an affair be expose , what be some of the specific thing that couple can do ? we know from trauma that healing begin when the perpetrator acknowledge their wrongdoing . so for the partner who have the affair , for nick , one thing be to end the affair , but the other be the essential , important act of express guilt and remorse for hurt his wife . but the truth be that I have notice that quite a lot of people who have affair may feel terribly guilty for hurt their partner , but they do not feel guilty for the experience of the affair itself . and that distinction be important . and nick , he need to hold vigil for the relationship . he need to become , for a while , the protector of the boundary . it be his responsibility to bring it up , because if he think about it , he can relieve heather from the obsession , and from have to make sure that the affair be not forget , and that in itself begin to restore trust .     but for heath , or deceive partner , it be essential to do thing that bring back a sense of self - worth , to surround oneself with love and with friend and activity that give back joy and meaning and identity . but even more important , be to curb the curiosity to mine for the sordid detail — where be you ? where do you do it ? how often ? be she well than I in bed ? — question that only inflict more pain , and keep you awake at night . and instead , switch to what I call the investigative question , the one that mine the meaning and the motive — what do this affair mean for you ? what be you able to express or experience there that you could no long do with I ? what be it like for you when you come home ? what be it about we that you value ? be you pleased this be over ?     every affair will redefine a relationship , and every couple will determine what the legacy of the affair will be . but affair be here to stay , and they be not go away . and the dilemma of love and desire , they do not yield just simple answer of black and white and good and bad , and victim and perpetrator . betrayal in a relationship come in many form . there be many way that we betray our partner : with contempt , with neglect , with indifference , with violence . sexual betrayal be only one way to hurt a partner . in other word , the victim of an affair be not always the victim of the marriage .     now , you 've listen to I , and I know what you be think : she have a french accent , she must be pro - affair . ( laughter ) so , you be wrong . I be not french . ( laughter ) ( applause ) and I be not pro - affair . but because I think that good can come out of an affair , I have often be ask this very strange question : would I ever recommend it ? now , I would no more recommend you have an affair than I would recommend you have cancer , and yet we know that people who have be ill often talk about how their illness have yield they a new perspective . the main question that I 've be ask since I arrive at this conference when I say I would talk about infidelity be , for or against ? I say , " yes . " ( laughter )     I look at affair from a dual perspective : hurt and betrayal on one side , growth and self - discovery on the other — what it do to you , and what it mean for I . and so when a couple come to I in the aftermath of an affair that have be reveal , I will often tell they this : today in the west , most of we be go to have two or three relationship or marriage , and some of we be go to do it with the same person . your first marriage be over . would you like to create a second one together ?     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be here to tell you about the real search for alien life . not little green humanoid arrive in shiny ufos , although that would be nice . but it be the search for planet orbit star far away .     every star in our sky be a sun . and if our sun have planet — mercury , venus , earth , mar , etc . , surely those other star should have planet also , and they do . and in the last two decade , astronomer have find thousand of exoplanet .     our night sky be literally teem with exoplanet . we know , statistically speak , that every star have at least one planet . and in the search for planet , and in the future , planet that might be like earth , we be able to help address some of the most amazing and mysterious question that have face humankind for century . why be we here ? why do our universe exist ? how do earth form and evolve ? how and why do life originate and populate our planet ? the second question that we often think about be : be we alone ? be there life out there ? who be out there ? you know , this question have be around for thousand of year , since at least the time of the greek philosopher . but I be here to tell you just how close we be get to find out the answer to this question . it be the first time in human history that this really be within reach for we .     now when I think about the possibility for life out there , I think of the fact that our sun be but one of many star . this be a photograph of a real galaxy , we think our milky way look like this galaxy . it be a collection of bind star . but our [ sun ] be one of hundred of billion of star and our galaxy be one of upwards of hundred of billion of galaxy . know that small planet be very common , you can just do the math . and there be just so many star and so many planet out there , that surely , there must be life somewhere out there . well , the biologist get furious with I for say that , because we have absolutely no evidence for life beyond earth yet .     well , if we be able to look at our galaxy from the outside and zoom in to where our sun be , we see a real map of the star . and the highlighted star be those with know exoplanet . this be really just the tip of the iceberg . here , this animation be zoom in onto our solar system . and you 'll see here the planet as well as some spacecraft that be also orbit our sun . now if we can imagine go to the west coast of north america , and look out at the night sky , here be what we would see on a spring night . and you can see the constellation overlaid and again , so many star with planet . there be a special patch of the sky where we have thousand of planet .     this be where the kepler space telescope focus for many year . let us zoom in and look at one of the favorite exoplanet . this star be call kepler-186f . it be a system of about five planet . and by the way , most of these exoplanet , we do not know too much about . we know their size , and their orbit and thing like that . but there be a very special planet here call kepler-186f . this planet be in a zone that be not too far from the star , so that the temperature may be just right for life . here , the artist 's conception be just zoom in and show you what that planet might be like .     so , many people have this romantic notion of astronomer go to the telescope on a lonely mountaintop and look at the spectacular night sky through a big telescope . but actually , we just work on our computer like everyone else , and we get our datum by email or download from a database . so instead of come here to tell you about the somewhat tedious nature of the datum and datum analysis and the complex computer model we make , I have a different way to try to explain to you some of the thing that we be think about exoplanet .     here be a travel poster : " kepler-186f : where the grass be always red on the other side . " that be because kepler-186f orbit a red star , and we be just speculate that perhaps the plant there , if there be vegetation that do photosynthesis , it have different pigment and look red . " enjoy the gravity on hd 40307 g , a super - earth . " this planet be more massive than earth and have a high surface gravity . " relax on kepler-16b , where your shadow always have company . " ( laughter ) we know of a dozen planet that orbit two star , and there be likely many more out there . if we could visit one of those planet , you literally would see two sunset and have two shadow . so actually , science fiction get some thing right . tatooine from star war . and I have a couple of other favorite exoplanet to tell you about . this one be kepler-10b , it be a hot , hot planet . it orbit over 50 time close to its star than our earth do to our sun . and actually , it be so hot , we can not visit any of these planet , but if we could , we would melt long before we get there . we think the surface be hot enough to melt rock and have liquid lava lake .     gliese 1214b . this planet , we know the mass and the size and it have a fairly low density . it be somewhat warm . we actually do not know really anything about this planet , but one possibility be that it be a water world , like a scale - up version of one of jupiter 's icy moon that might be 50 percent water by mass . and in this case , it would have a thick steam atmosphere overlay an ocean , not of liquid water , but of an exotic form of water , a superfluid — not quite a gas , not quite a liquid . and under that would not be rock , but a form of high - pressure ice , like ice ix .     so out of all these planet out there , and the variety be just simply astonishing , we mostly want to find the planet that be goldilock planet , we call they . not too big , not too small , not too hot , not too cold — but just right for life . but to do that , we would have to be able to look at the planet 's atmosphere , because the atmosphere act like a blanket trap heat — the greenhouse effect . we have to be able to assess the greenhouse gas on other planet . well , science fiction get some thing wrong . the star trek enterprise have to travel vast distance at incredible speed to orbit other planet so that first officer spock could analyze the atmosphere to see if the planet be habitable or if there be lifeform there .     well , we do not need to travel at warp speed to see other planet atmosphere , although I do not want to dissuade any bud engineer from figure out how to do that . we actually can and do study planet atmosphere from here , from earth orbit . this be a picture , a photograph of the hubble space telescope take by the shuttle atlantis as it be depart after the last human space flight to hubble . they instal a new camera , actually , that we use for exoplanet atmosphere . and so far , we 've be able to study dozen of exoplanet atmosphere , about six of they in great detail . but those be not small planet like earth . they be big , hot planet that be easy to see . we be not ready , we do not have the right technology yet to study small exoplanet . but nevertheless , I want to try to explain to you how we study exoplanet atmosphere .     I want you to imagine , for a moment , a rainbow . and if we could look at this rainbow closely , we would see that some dark line be miss . and here be our sun , the white light of our sun split up , not by raindrop , but by a spectrograph . and you can see all these dark , vertical line . some be very narrow , some be wide , some be shade at the edge . and this be actually how astronomer have study object in the heaven , literally , for over a century . so here , each different atom and molecule have a special set of line , a fingerprint , if you will . and that be how we study exoplanet atmosphere . and I 'll just never forget when I start work on exoplanet atmosphere 20 year ago , how many people tell I , " this will never happen . we 'll never be able to study they . why be you bother ? " and that be why I be pleased to tell you about all the atmosphere study now , and this be really a field of its own . so when it come to other planet , other earth , in the future when we can observe they , what kind of gas would we be look for ? well , you know , our own earth have oxygen in the atmosphere to 20 percent by volume . that be a lot of oxygen . but without plant and photosynthetic life , there would be no oxygen , virtually no oxygen in our atmosphere . so oxygen be here because of life . and our goal then be to look for gas in other planet atmosphere , gas that do not belong , that we might be able to attribute to life . but which molecule should we search for ? I actually tell you how diverse exoplanet be . we expect that to continue in the future when we find other earth .     and that be one of the main thing I be work on now , I have a theory about this . it remind I that nearly every day , I receive an email or email from someone with a crazy theory about physics of gravity or cosmology or some such . so , please do not email I one of your crazy theory . ( laughter ) well , I have my own crazy theory . but , who do the mit professor go to ? well , I email a nobel laureate in physiology or medicine and he say , " sure , come and talk to I . " so I bring my two biochemistry friend and we go to talk to he about our crazy theory . and that theory be that life produce all small molecule , so many molecule . like , everything I could think of , but not be a chemist . think about it : carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , molecular hydrogen , molecular nitrogen , methane , methyl chloride — so many gas . they also exist for other reason , but just life even produce ozone . so we go to talk to he about this , and immediately , he shoot down the theory . he find an example that do not exist . so , we go back to the drawing board and we think we have find something very interesting in another field .     but back to exoplanet , the point be that life produce so many different type of gas , literally thousand of gas . and so what we be do now be just try to figure out on which type of exoplanet , which gas could be attribute to life . and so when it come time when we find gas in exoplanet atmosphere that we will not know if they be be produce by intelligent alien or by tree , or a swamp , or even just by simple , single - celle microbial life .     so work on the model and think about biochemistry , it be all well and good . but a really big challenge ahead of we be : how ? how be we go to find these planet ? there be actually many way to find planet , several different way . but the one that I be most focused on be how can we open a gateway so that in the future , we can find hundred of earth . we have a real shot at find sign of life . and actually , I just finish lead a two - year project in this very special phase of a concept we call the starshade . and the starshade be a very specially shape screen and the goal be to fly that starshade so it block out the light of a star so that the telescope can see the planet directly . here , you can see myself and two team member hold up one small part of the starshade . it be shape like a giant flower , and this be one of the prototype petal . the concept be that a starshade and telescope could launch together , with the petal unfurl from the stow position . the central truss would expand , with the petal snap into place . now , this have to be make very precisely , literally , the petal to micron and they have to deploy to millimeter . and this whole structure would have to fly ten of thousand of kilometer away from the telescope . it be about ten of meter in diameter . and the goal be to block out the starlight to incredible precision so that we would be able to see the planet directly . and it have to be a very special shape , because of the physics of defraction . now this be a real project that we work on , literally , you would not believe how hard . just so you believe it be not just in movie format , here be a real photograph of a second - generation starshade deployment test bed in the lab . and in this case , I just want you to know that that central truss have heritage leave over from large radio deployable in space .     so after all of that hard work where we try to think of all the crazy gas that might be out there , and we build the very complicated space telescope that might be out there , what be we go to find ? well , in the good case , we will find an image of another exo - earth . here be earth as a pale blue dot . and this be actually a real photograph of earth take by the voyager 1 spacecraft , four billion mile away . and that red light be just scatter light in the camera optic .     but what be so awesome to consider be that if there be intelligent alien orbit on a planet around a star near to we and they build complicated space telescope of the kind that we be try to build , all they 'll see be this pale blue dot , a pinprick of light . and so sometimes , when I pause to think about my professional struggle and huge ambition , it be hard to think about that in contrast to the vastness of the universe . but nonetheless , I be devote the rest of my life to find another earth .     and I can guarantee     that in the next generation of space telescope , in the second generation , we will have the capability to find and identity other earth . and the capability to split up the starlight so that we can look for gas and assess the greenhouse gas in the atmosphere , estimate the surface temperature , and look for sign of life .     but there be more . in this case of search for other planet like earth , we be make a new kind of map of the nearby star and of the planet orbit they , include [ planet ] that actually might be inhabitable by human .     and so I envision that our descendant , hundred of year from now , will embark on an interstellar journey to other world . and they will look back at all of we as the generation who first find the earth - like world .     thank you .     ( applause )     june cohen : and I give you , for a question , rosetta mission manager fred jansen .     fred jansen : you mention halfway through that the technology to actually look at the spectrum of an exoplanet like earth be not there yet . when do you expect this will be there , and what be need ?     actually , what we expect be what we call our next - generation hubble telescope . and this be call the james webb space telescope , and that will launch in 2018 , and that be what we be go to do , we be go to look at a special kind of planet call transient exoplanet , and that will be our first shot at study small planet for gas that might indicate the planet be habitable .     jc : I be go to ask you one follow - up question , too , sara , as the generalist . so I be really strike by the notion in your career of the opposition you face , that when you begin think about exoplanet , there be extreme skepticism in the scientific community that they exist , and you prove they wrong . what do it take to take that on ?     ss : well , the thing be that as scientist , we be suppose to be skeptical , because our job to make sure that what the other person be say actually make sense or not . but be a scientist , I think you 've see it from this session , it be like be an explorer . you have this immense curiosity , this stubbornness , this sort of resolute will that you will go forward no matter what other people say .     jc : I love that . thank you , sara .     ( applause )  
   mark twain sum up what I take to be one of the fundamental problem of cognitive science with a single witticism . he say , " there be something fascinating about science . one get such wholesale return of conjecture out of such a trifling investment in fact . " ( laughter )     twain mean it as a joke , of course , but he be right : there be something fascinating about science . from a few bone , we infer the existence of dinosuar . from spectral line , the composition of nebulae . from fruit fly , the mechanism of heredity , and from reconstructed image of blood flow through the brain , or in my case , from the behavior of very young child , we try to say something about the fundamental mechanism of human cognition . in particular , in my lab in the department of brain and cognitive science at mit , I have spend the past decade try to understand the mystery of how child learn so much from so little so quickly . because , it turn out that the fascinating thing about science be also a fascinating thing about child , which , to put a gentler spin on mark twain , be precisely their ability to draw rich , abstract inference rapidly and accurately from sparse , noisy datum . I be go to give you just two example today . one be about a problem of generalization , and the other be about a problem of causal reasoning . and although I be go to talk about work in my lab , this work be inspire by and indebte to a field . I be grateful to mentor , colleague , and collaborator around the world .     let I start with the problem of generalization . generalize from small sample of datum be the bread and butter of science . we poll a tiny fraction of the electorate and we predict the outcome of national election . we see how a handful of patient respond to treatment in a clinical trial , and we bring drug to a national market . but this only work if our sample be randomly draw from the population . if our sample be cherry - pick in some way — say , we poll only urban voter , or say , in our clinical trial for treatment for heart disease , we include only man — the result may not generalize to the broad population .     so scientist care whether evidence be randomly sample or not , but what do that have to do with baby ? well , baby have to generalize from small sample of datum all the time . they see a few rubber duck and learn that they float , or a few ball and learn that they bounce . and they develop expectation about duck and ball that they be go to extend to rubber duck and ball for the rest of their life . and the kind of generalization baby have to make about duck and ball they have to make about almost everything : shoe and ship and seal wax and cabbage and king .     so do baby care whether the tiny bit of evidence they see be plausibly representative of a large population ? let us find out . I be go to show you two movie , one from each of two condition of an experiment , and because you be go to see just two movie , you be go to see just two baby , and any two baby differ from each other in innumerable way . but these baby , of course , here stand in for group of baby , and the difference you be go to see represent average group difference in baby ' behavior across condition . in each movie , you be go to see a baby do maybe just exactly what you might expect a baby to do , and we can hardly make baby more magical than they already be . but to my mind the magical thing , and what I want you to pay attention to , be the contrast between these two condition , because the only thing that differ between these two movie be the statistical evidence the baby be go to observe . we be go to show baby a box of blue and yellow ball , and my then - graduate student , now colleague at stanford , hyowon gweon , be go to pull three blue ball in a row out of this box , and when she pull those ball out , she be go to squeeze they , and the ball be go to squeak . and if you be a baby , that be like a ted talk . it do not get well than that . ( laughter ) but the important point be it be really easy to pull three blue ball in a row out of a box of mostly blue ball . you could do that with your eye close . it be plausibly a random sample from this population . and if you can reach into a box at random and pull out thing that squeak , then maybe everything in the box squeak . so maybe baby should expect those yellow ball to squeak as well . now , those yellow ball have funny stick on the end , so baby could do other thing with they if they want to . they could pound they or whack they . but let us see what the baby do .     ( video ) hyowon gweon : see this ? ( ball squeak ) do you see that ? ( ball squeak ) cool . see this one ? ( ball squeak ) wow .     laura schulz : tell you . ( laughs )     ( video ) hg : see this one ? ( ball squeak ) hey clara , this one be for you . you can go ahead and play . ( laughter )     ls : I do not even have to talk , right ? all right , it be nice that baby will generalize property of blue ball to yellow ball , and it be impressive that baby can learn from imitate we , but we 've know those thing about baby for a very long time . the really interesting question be what happen when we show baby exactly the same thing , and we can ensure it be exactly the same because we have a secret compartment and we actually pull the ball from there , but this time , all we change be the apparent population from which that evidence be draw . this time , we be go to show baby three blue ball pull out of a box of mostly yellow ball , and guess what ? you [ probably will not ] randomly draw three blue ball in a row out of a box of mostly yellow ball . that be not plausibly randomly sample evidence . that evidence suggest that maybe hyowon be deliberately sample the blue ball . maybe there be something special about the blue ball . maybe only the blue ball squeak . let us see what the baby do .     ( video ) hg : see this ? ( ball squeak ) see this toy ? ( ball squeak ) oh , that be cool . see ? ( ball squeak ) now this one be for you to play . you can go ahead and play .     ( fussing ) ( laughter )     ls : so you just see two 15 - month - old baby do entirely different thing base only on the probability of the sample they observe . let I show you the experimental result . on the vertical axis , you 'll see the percentage of baby who squeeze the ball in each condition , and as you 'll see , baby be much more likely to generalize the evidence when it be plausibly representative of the population than when the evidence be clearly cherry - pick . and this lead to a fun prediction : suppose you pull just one blue ball out of the mostly yellow box . you [ probably will not ] pull three blue ball in a row at random out of a yellow box , but you could randomly sample just one blue ball . that be not an improbable sample . and if you could reach into a box at random and pull out something that squeak , maybe everything in the box squeak . so even though baby be go to see much less evidence for squeaking , and have many few action to imitate in this one ball condition than in the condition you just see , we predict that baby themselves would squeeze more , and that be exactly what we find . so 15 - month - old baby , in this respect , like scientist , care whether evidence be randomly sample or not , and they use this to develop expectation about the world : what squeak and what do not , what to explore and what to ignore .     let I show you another example now , this time about a problem of causal reasoning . and it start with a problem of confounded evidence that all of we have , which be that we be part of the world . and this might not seem like a problem to you , but like most problem , it be only a problem when thing go wrong . take this baby , for instance . thing be go wrong for he . he would like to make this toy go , and he can not . I 'll show you a few - second clip . and there be two possibility , broadly : maybe he be do something wrong , or maybe there be something wrong with the toy . so in this next experiment , we be go to give baby just a tiny bit of statistical datum support one hypothesis over the other , and we be go to see if baby can use that to make different decision about what to do .     here be the setup . hyowon be go to try to make the toy go and succeed . I be then go to try twice and fail both time , and then hyowon be go to try again and succeed , and this roughly sum up my relationship to my graduate student in technology across the board . but the important point here be it provide a little bit of evidence that the problem be not with the toy , it be with the person . some people can make this toy go , and some can not . now , when the baby get the toy , he be go to have a choice . his mom be right there , so he can go ahead and hand off the toy and change the person , but there be also go to be another toy at the end of that cloth , and he can pull the cloth towards he and change the toy . so let us see what the baby do .     ( video ) hg : two , three . go ! ( music ) ls : one , two , three , go ! arthur , I be go to try again . one , two , three , go ! yg : arthur , let I try again , okay ? one , two , three , go ! ( music ) look at that . remember these toy ? see these toy ? yeah , I be go to put this one over here , and I be go to give this one to you . you can go ahead and play . ls : okay , laura , but of course , baby love their mommy . of course baby give toy to their mommy when they can not make they work . so again , the really important question be what happen when we change the statistical datum ever so slightly . this time , baby be go to see the toy work and fail in exactly the same order , but we be change the distribution of evidence . this time , hyowon be go to succeed once and fail once , and so be i. and this suggest it do not matter who try this toy , the toy be break . it do not work all the time . again , the baby be go to have a choice . her mom be right next to she , so she can change the person , and there be go to be another toy at the end of the cloth . let us watch what she do .     ( video ) hg : two , three , go ! ( music ) let I try one more time . one , two , three , go ! hmm .     ls : let I try , clara . one , two , three , go ! hmm , let I try again . one , two , three , go ! ( music ) hg : I be go to put this one over here , and I be go to give this one to you . you can go ahead and play . ( applause )     ls : let I show you the experimental result . on the vertical axis , you 'll see the distribution of child 's choice in each condition , and you 'll see that the distribution of the choice child make depend on the evidence they observe . so in the second year of life , baby can use a tiny bit of statistical datum to decide between two fundamentally different strategy for act in the world : ask for help and explore . I 've just show you two laboratory experiment out of literally hundred in the field that make similar point , because the really critical point be that child 's ability to make rich inference from sparse datum underlie all the species - specific cultural learning that we do . child learn about new tool from just a few example . they learn new causal relationship from just a few example . they even learn new word , in this case in american sign language .     I want to close with just two point . if you 've be follow my world , the field of brain and cognitive science , for the past few year , three big idea will have come to your attention . the first be that this be the era of the brain . and indeed , there have be staggering discovery in neuroscience : localize functionally specialized region of cortex , turn mouse brain transparent , activate neuron with light . a second big idea be that this be the era of big datum and machine learning , and machine learning promise to revolutionize our understanding of everything from social network to epidemiology . and maybe , as it tackle problem of scene understanding and natural language processing , to tell we something about human cognition . and the final big idea you 'll have hear be that maybe it be a good idea we be go to know so much about brain and have so much access to big datum , because leave to our own device , human be fallible , we take shortcut , we err , we make mistake , we be biased , and in innumerable way , we get the world wrong . I think these be all important story , and they have a lot to tell we about what it mean to be human , but I want you to note that today I tell you a very different story . it be a story about mind and not brain , and in particular , it be a story about the kind of computation that uniquely human mind can perform , which involve rich , structured knowledge and the ability to learn from small amount of datum , the evidence of just a few example . and fundamentally , it be a story about how start as very small child and continue out all the way to the great accomplishment of our culture , we get the world right .     folk , human mind do not only learn from small amount of datum . human mind think of altogether new idea . human mind generate research and discovery , and human mind generate art and literature and poetry and theater , and human mind take care of other human : our old , our young , our sick . we even heal they . in the year to come , we be go to see technological innovation beyond anything I can even envision , but we be very unlikely to see anything even approximate the computational power of a human child in my lifetime or in your . if we invest in these most powerful learner and their development , in baby and child and mother and father and caregiver and teacher the way we invest in our other most powerful and elegant form of technology , engineering and design , we will not just be dream of a well future , we will be plan for one .     thank you very much .     ( applause )     chris anderson : laura , thank you . I do actually have a question for you . first of all , the research be insane . I mean , who would design an experiment like that ? ( laughter ) I 've see that a couple of time , and I still do not honestly believe that that can truly be happen , but other people have do similar experiment ; it check out . the baby really be that genius .     ls : you know , they look really impressive in our experiment , but think about what they look like in real life , right ? it start out as a baby . eighteen month later , it be talk to you , and baby ' first word be not just thing like ball and duck , they be thing like " all gone , " which refer to disappearance , or " uh - oh , " which refer to unintentional action . it have to be that powerful . it have to be much more powerful than anything I show you . they be figure out the entire world . a four - year - old can talk to you about almost anything . ( applause )     can : and if I understand you right , the other key point you be make be , we 've be through these year where there be all this talk of how quirky and buggy our mind be , that behavioral economic and the whole theory behind that that we be not rational agent . you be really say that the big story be how extraordinary , and there really be genius there that be underappreciated .     ls : one of my favorite quote in psychology come from the social psychologist solomon asch , and he say the fundamental task of psychology be to remove the veil of self - evidence from thing . there be order of magnitude more decision you make every day that get the world right . you know about object and their property . you know they when they be occlude . you know they in the dark . you can walk through room . you can figure out what other people be think . you can talk to they . you can navigate space . you know about number . you know causal relationship . you know about moral reasoning . you do this effortlessly , so we do not see it , but that be how we get the world right , and it be a remarkable and very difficult - to - understand accomplishment .     can : I suspect there be people in the audience who have this view of accelerate technological power who might dispute your statement that never in our lifetime will a computer do what a three - year - old child can do , but what be clear be that in any scenario , our machine have so much to learn from our toddler . ls : I think so . you 'll have some machine learning folk up here . I mean , you should never bet against baby or chimpanzee or technology as a matter of practice , but it be not just a difference in quantity , it be a difference in kind . we have incredibly powerful computer , and they do do amazingly sophisticated thing , often with very big amount of datum . human mind do , I think , something quite different , and I think it be the structure , hierarchical nature of human knowledge that remain a real challenge .     can : laura schulz , wonderful food for thought . thank you so much .     ls : thank you . ( applause )  
   in 2011 , during the final six month of kim jong - il 's life , I live undercover in north korea .     I be bear and raise in south korea , their enemy . I live in america , their other enemy .     since 2002 , I have visit north korea a few time . and I have come to realize that to write about it with any meaning , or to understand the place beyond the regime 's propaganda , the only option be total immersion . so I pose as a teacher and a missionary at an all - male university in pyongyang .     the pyongyang university of science and technology be found by evangelical christian who cooperate with the regime to educate the son of the north korean elite , without proselytizing , which be a capital crime there . the student be 270 young man , expect to be the future leader of the most isolated and brutal dictatorship in existence . when I arrive , they become my student .     2011 be a special year , mark the 100th anniversary of the birth of north korea 's original great leader , kim il - sung . to celebrate the occasion , the regime shut down all university , and send student off to the field to build the dprk 's much - herald ideal as the world 's most powerful and prosperous nation . my student be the only one spare from that fate .     north korea be a gulag pose as a nation . everything there be about the great leader . every book , every newspaper article , every song , every tv program — there be just one subject . the flower be name after he , the mountain be carve with his slogan . every citizen wear the badge of the great leader at all time . even their calendar system begin with the birth of kim il - sung .     the school be a heavily guard prison , pose as a campus . teacher could only leave on group outing accompany by an official minder . even then , our trip be limit to sanctioned national monument celebrate the great leader . the student be not allow to leave the campus , or communicate with their parent . their day be meticulously map out , and any free time they have be devote to honor their great leader . lesson plan have to meet the approval of north korean staff , every class be record and report on , every room be bug , and every conversation , overhear . every blank space be cover with the   portrait of kim il - sung and kim jong - il , like everywhere else in north korea .     we be never allow to discuss the outside world . as student of science and technology , many of they be computer major but they do not know the existence of the internet . they have never hear of mark zuckerberg or steve job . facebook , twitter — none of those thing would have mean a thing . and I could not tell they .     I go there look for truth . but where do you even start when an entire nation 's ideology , my student ' day - to - day reality , and even my own position at the university , be all build on lie ?     I start with a game . we play " truth and lie . " a volunteer would write a sentence on the chalkboard , and the other student have to guess whether it be a truth or a lie . once a student write , " I visit china last year on vacation , " and everyone shout , " lie ! " you all know this be not possible . virtually no north korean be allow to leave the country . even travel within their own country require a travel pass .     I have hope that this game would reveal some truth about my student , because they lie so often and so easily , whether about the mythical accomplishment of their great leader , or the strange claim that they clone a rabbit as fifth grader . the difference between truth and lie seem at time hazy to they . it take I a while to understand the different type of lie ; they lie to shield their system from the world , or they be teach lie , and be just regurgitate they . or , at moment , they lie out of habit . but if all they have ever know be lie , how could we expect they to be otherwise ?     next , I try to teach they essay writing . but that turn out to be nearly impossible . essay be about come up with one 's own thesis , and make an evidence - base argument to prove it . these student , however , be simply tell what to think , and they obey . in their world , critical thinking be not allow .     I also give they the weekly assignment of write a personal letter , to anybody . it take a long time , but eventually some of they begin to write to their mother , their friend , their girlfriend . although those be just homework , and would never reach their intend recipient , my student slowly begin to reveal their true feeling in they . they write that they be feed up with the sameness of everything . they be worried about their future . in those letter , they rarely ever mention their great leader .     I be spend all of my time with these young man . we all eat meal together , play basketball together . I often call they gentleman , which make they giggle . they blush at the mention of girl . and I come to adore they . and watch they open up even in the tiny of way , be deeply move .     but something also feel wrong . during those month of live in their world , I often wonder if the truth would , in fact , improve their life . I want so much to tell they the truth , of their country and of the outside world , where arab youth be turn their rotten regime inside out , use the power of social medium , where everyone except they be connect through the world wide web , which be not worldwide after all . but for they , the truth be dangerous . by encourage they to run after it , I be put they at risk — of persecution , of heartbreak .     when you be not allow to express anything in the open , you become good at read what be unspoken . in one of their personal letter to I , a student write that he understand why I always call they gentleman . it be because I be wish they to be gentle in life , he say .     on my last day in december of 2011 , the day kim jong - il 's death be announce , their world shatter . I have to leave without a proper goodbye . but I think they know how sad I be for they .     once , toward the end of my stay , a student say to I , " professor , we never think of you as be different from we . our circumstance be different , but you be the same as we . we want you to know that we truly think of you as be the same . "     today , if I could respond to my student with a letter of my own , which be of course impossible , I would tell they this : " my dear gentleman , it be be a bit over three year since I last see you . and now , you must be 22 — maybe even as old as 23 . at our final class , I ask you if there be anything you want . the only wish you express , the only thing you ever ask of I in all those month we spend together , be for I to speak to you in korean . just once . I be there to teach you english ; you know it be not allow . but I understand then , you want to share that bond of our mother tongue . I call you my gentleman , but I do not know if be gentle in kim jong - un 's merciless north korea be a good thing . I do not want you to lead a revolution — let some other young person do it . the rest of the world might casually encourage or even expect some sort of north korean spring , but I do not want you to do anything risky , because I know in your world , someone be always watch . I do not want to imagine what might happen to you . if my attempt to reach you have inspire something new in you , I would rather you forget I . become soldier of your great leader , and live long , safe life . you once ask I if I think your city of pyongyang be beautiful , and I could not answer truthfully then . but I know why you ask . I know that it be important for you to hear that I , your teacher , the one who have see the world that you be forbid from , declare your city as the most beautiful . I know hear that would make your life there a bit more bearable , but no , I do not find your capital beautiful . not because it be monotone and concrete , but because of what it symbolize : a monster that feed off the rest of the country , where citizen be soldier and slave . all I see there be darkness . but it be your home , so I can not hate it . and I hope instead that you , my lovely young gentleman , will one day help make it beautiful .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   this be a play call " sell / buy / date . " it be my first since " bridge and tunnel , " which I do on broadway , and this one , I — thank you — I 've excerpt it just for you , so here we go .     right . class , let us be absolutely certain all electronic device be switch off before we begin . so class , hopefully you 'll recognize what you just hear I say as the — ? very good , the cellular phone announcement . right ? this be also know as a mobile phone . so you 'll remember , people of that era would have have an external electronic device , right , something like this , and you all would have carry one of these around with they , and amongst their big fear be the sheer mortification that one of these might ring at some inopportune moment . right ? so a bit of trivium about that era for you . ( laughter )     so the format of today 's class be I will be present multiple bert module today from that period in history , right , so start circa 2016 . and remember , this be the very first year of the bert program . so we 've get quite a few of these to get through . bear in mind , I will be live into various different body , different age , also what be then call race , or ethnic group , as you 'll remember from unit 1 . and — ( laughter ) — and along the gender continuum , I will be live into male as well . it be quite binary at that time . ( laughter ) also , do not forget , we be read the book module for next week 's focus on gender . now , I know some of you have request the book in pill form . I know people still believe ingest it be well for retention , but since we be try to experience what our forebear do , right , let us please just consider do the actual ocular reading , okay ? and also , how many people have your emotional shunt engage ? right . please toggle they off . okay ? I know it be challenge , but I want you to be able to feel the entire natural emo range , all right ? it be essential to this part of the syllabus . yes , macy ? all right . I understand . if you be unwilling to — all right , well , we can discuss that after class . all right , we will discuss your concern . just relax . nobody be die and go to compost . okay . after class . okay ? after class . let us just get start , okay . this first subject identify as a middle - class homemaker . remember , these early module in these people 's full identity be protect , and this allow they to speak more freely on our topic , which for many of they be taboo .     okay honey , now , I be ready when you be . no , sweetheart , I say , I be ready when you be . I be freeze . it be like a meat locker in here in this recording studio . I should have bring a shmata . all this fancy technology but they can not afford heat . what be he say ? I can not hear you ! I can not hear you through the glass , honey ! there you be in my ear . oh , you can hear I ? the whole time . oh , yes , I be a little chilly . yes , oh the cold be for the machine , the new technology . okay . yes , now remind I again , you be record not only my voice but my feeling and my memory ? right . yes , bert , yes , I read about it . bio - empathetic resonant technology . right , right , so people will be able to feel my experience and my memory ? okay . no , right , I be ready . I just think you be go to give I a test to see how my memory 's doing . I be go to tell you you be too late , it be already bad news . no , no , go ahead , honey .     oh , that be the first question ? what do I think of prostitution ? be you solicit I , young man ? I 've hear of may - december romance , but what be you , about 20 year old ? eighteen ? eighteen year . I think I have candy in my purse old than 18 year old . ( laughter ) I be tease you , sweetheart . no , I be comfortable with any question . sure . so about the prostitution — oh , sex worker , sex worker . no , just in my day , they call it prostitution , not sex work . oh , because it include pornography also ? okay . no , well , I guess when I be a girl , we do not really have a name for that either . we would have say dirty magazine , I suppose , or dirty movie . well , it be not like what you have with the internet . no , well , I do not mind sharing . my late husband and I , we be a very romantic couple . lot of tenderness , you understand . well , as you get old , you know , at one point I think my husband might be help by use some of the pill man can take , but he be not interested in those , so I think , what about maybe watch an adult movie on the internet ? just for inspiration , you understand . well , at the time , neither of we be very good on the computer , so usually , if we need help with the internet , we would just call our child or our grandchild , but obviously , in this case , that be not an option , so I think , I 'll have a look myself , just to see . how difficult could it be ? you search for certain key word and you look — oh wow be right , young man . you can not imagine what I see . well , first of all , I be just try to find , you know , couple , normal couple make love , but this , so many people together at one time . you could not tell which part belong to which body . how they even get the camera to capture some of this , I could not tell you . but the one thing they do not capture be make love . there be lot of make of something , but they take the love part right out of it , you know , the fun . it be all very extreme , you know ? like you would say , with the extreme sport . lot of endurance , but never tenderness . so anyway , needless to say , that be $ 19.95 I 'll never get back again , but it only show up on the credit card as " entertainment service , " so my husband be never the wise , and after all of that , well , you could say it turn out he do not need the extra inspiration after all .     right , so next subject be a young woman — ( applause ) — next subject , class , be a young woman call bella , a university student interview in 2016 during what be call an intro to feminist porn class as part of her major in sex work at a college in the bay area . ( laughter )     yeah , I just want to , like , get a recording of , like , you guy record I , like a meta recording , or whatever . it be just like this whole experience be just , like , really amazing , and I would like to capture that for , like , instagram and my tumblr . so , like , hi guy , it be I , bella , and I be , like , be interview right now for this , like , really amazing bio - empathetic resonance technology , which be , like , basically where they be , like , record , as you can see from these , whatever , like , electrode , the formation of , like , neuropeptide in my hippocampus , or whatever . they will later be able to reconstitute these as , like , my own actual memory , like actual experience , so other people can , like , actually feel what I be feel right now . okay . okay .     so , like , hello , bert person of the future who be experience I . this be what it feel like to be , like , a college freshman , and also the , like , headache that you be experience through I be the , like , residual effect of the jell - o shot which I have last night at the bi - weekly feminist pole dancing party which I cohost on wednesday . it be call " do not get all pole - emical " — ( laughter ) — and it be in beekman hall , and , what else , like , non - jell - o shot be also available for vegan , and , oh , okay , yeah , totally , yeah , we should also focus on your question also .     so for your record , I be , like , a sex work study major but minore in social medium with a concentration on notable youtube meme . ( laughter ) yes , well , of course , like , I consider myself to be , like , obviously , like , a feminist . I be name for bella abzug , who be , like , a famous , like , feminist from history , and , like , also I feel that it be , like , important to , like , represent woman who be , like , sex - positive feminist . what be sex - negative ? well , like , I guess I would ask , like , what do you think sex - negative be ? ( laughter ) yeah , because , like , the term that we use be , like , so important , because , like , we call it sex work because it help people understand that , like , it be work , and , like , you know , just like there be , like , healthcare provider and , like , insurance provider , like , we think of these worker as , like , sex care provider . yeah , but like , I do not think of myself like , provide direct sex care service per se as , like , be a requirement for I to be , like , an advocate . like , I support other woman 's right to choose it voluntarily , like , if they enjoy it . yeah , but , like , I see myself go forward as more likely , like , protect sex worker ' , like , legal freedom and right . yeah , so , like , basically , I be plan on become a lawyer .     right , class . ( laughter ) ( applause ) so these next two module be also circa 2016 . one subject be an irishwoman with a particularly noteworthy relationship to this issue , but first will be a west indian woman , a self - describe escort who be record at a sex worker ' right rally and parade . she be interview whilst marching in full carnival headdress and very little else .     all right , you want I to start talk now . yeah , I tell you , you can put those wire anywhere you want to as long as it do not get in the way . yeah , no , but , tell I again what the name of — bert ? bert . yeah , I be tell you , you know , I think I have in all my time I have have at least one client with that name , so this will not be the first time I have bert all over I . oh , I be sorry , but you got to get into the spirit of it if you be go to interview I . all right ? you can say it . no justice , no piece ! no justice , no piece ! but you see the sign ? you get it ? p - I - e - c - e. no justice , no piece of we . you understand ?     right , so that be the part where I be tell you be that when I first come to this country , I work every job I could find . I be a nanny ; I be a home care attendant for all these different old people , and then I say , child , if I have to touch another white man 's backside , I might as well get pay a lot more money for it than this , you understand ? pshh , you know how hard it be be a domestic worker ? some of these man , they be heavy . you have to pick they up and flip they over . now , I let they pick I up and flip I over , you understand ? well , you have to have a sense of humor about it , that be what I think . no , but see , listen , you find I somebody who do not hate some part of their job . I mean , there be a lot of thing about this job that I hate , but the money be not one of they , and I will tell you , as long as this be the good possibility for I to make real money , I be go to be jamaican - no - fakin ' if that be what they want to call I . no , I be not even from jamaica . that be how they market I . my family be from trinidad and the virgin island . they do not know what I do , but you know what ? my child , they know that their school fee be pay , they have their book and their computer , and this way , I know that they have a chance . so I be not go to tell you that what I do , it be easy , I be not go to tell you that I feel — what be that you say , liberate ? but I be go to tell you that I feel pay . right . ( applause )     thank , that be lovely , and just the cup of tea , love , and just a splash of the whiskey . it be perfect , that be grand . just a drop more . a splash . perfect . what be your name ? peter ? be that right , so , peter ? right . so that , that be the unique part of it for I , right , be that I end up in both , first in the convent , and then in the prostitution after . that be right . ( laughter ) so one woman at the university here in dublin , she write about I . she say , maureen fitzroy be the live embodiment of the whore - virgin dichotomy . right ? ( laughter ) do not it sound like something you need to go into hospital ? well , I 've get this terrible dichotomy . do not it .     right . well , for I though , it be , as a girl , it start with I dad . I mean , half the time , when he speak to we , it be just a sort of tell we we be all useless rotten idiot and we have no moral , that type of thing . and I certainly do not do myself any favor . by the time I be 16 , I have start mess about with this old fella , and he want it to be our little secret , and I do as I be tell , do not I , and when that get back to I dad , he have I send straightaway to the convent . well no , that old fella , he would still come to find I in the convent . yeah , he would leave I note tuck into the hole in the brick at the back of the charity shop so we could meet . and he would tell I how he be leave his wife , and I believe he , until I get pregnant . I do , peter , and I leave he a note about it in our special place there , and I never do hear from he again . no , I give it up for adoption so it could have a decent life , and then they would not let I back into the convent .     no , my one sister virginia give I a fiver for the coach to dublin , and that be how I end up here . well , surprise , surprise , I fall in love with another fella much old than I , and I always say I be just so happy because he do not drink , I marry the bastard .     well , he do not drink , but he do have just the wee heroin problem , do not he , and — that be right , and before I know it , he be the one who turn I on to the prostitution , my own husband . he have I support the both of we . I be 18 . well , it be not pretty woman , I can tell you that . that julia roberts , if she would ever have to sleep with a man to put a few pound in her pocket , I do not think she would ever have make that film . well , for your record , my opinion of the legalization , I would say I be against it . I just , I do not care what these young girl say . you know , live like that , you be just lose , and , you know , I be 63 year old . I be still try to find who I be . you know , I never be a wife or a nun , or a prostitute even , really , not really . nobody ever ask who I want to be . they just tell I , and if you legalize it , then you be really tell these girl , " go on and get lose for a living , " and a lot of they , they 'll do as they be tell .     all right , so four perspective from four quite — ( applause ) — four quite different voice there , right ? one woman say sex itself be natural but the sex industry seem to mechanize or industrialize it . then the second woman consider sex work to be empower , liberating , and feminist , though she , herself , notably , do not seem keen to do it . the third woman , who actually be a so - call sex worker do not agree that it be liberate but she want the right to the economic empowerment , and then we hear the fourth woman say not only prostitution itself but proscribe role for woman in general prevent she from ever find who she be , right ?     so another fact most people do not know be the average age of an at - risk girl be introduce to the sex industry be 12 or 13 .     also consider that the age when all girl in that society first became expose to sexualize image of woman be quite a bit early , right ? this be a doll call barbie , right ? I initially think she be an educational tool for anorexia prevention — ( laughter ) — but actually she be consider by many to be a wholesome symbol of femininity , and often young girl begin what be call dieting . remember this ? this be restrict food intake on purpose by the age of six , and define themselves base on attractiveness by around that same time . right ?     yes ? right , bradley , okay , excellent point . so there be a lucrative market in that society in convince all people they have to look a certain way to even have a sex life , right ? but girl , especially , be expect to be " sexy " while avoid be perceive as " slut " for be sexual . right ? so there be that shame piece we 've hear about .     yes . valerie , right ? okay , very good . of course , man be have sex as well , but you 'll remember from the reading , what be male slut call ? very good , they be call man . ( laughter ) ( applause ) so not easy live in a world like that , right ? though it be not all bad news either . most woman in the early 2000 consider themselves empower , and man generally feel they be also evolve in this area , and , in fact , most people would have be aware of issue like human trafficking , for example , but they would have see that as quite separate from more recreational adult entertainment . and so we 'll just very briefly , class — we do not have a lot of time — we 'll just very briefly hear from a man on our topic at this stage . so this next subject be interview on the night of his bachelor party .     dude , can you , all right , can you just keep it down ? I be try to talk to bert right now . oh , your name 's not bert . bert 's the name of the , oh , all right . no , no , no , totally , it be totally fine . I be mostly sober , so I just want to be helpful . yeah , and I totally believe in cause , yeah , like , all that stuff . ( laughter ) and actually , I be wear tom right now . yeah , tom , like , the shoe , like , you buy a pair and then a kid in africa get clean water . yeah . totally . but what be the question again ? sorry .     of course I believe in woman 's right . I be marry a woman . ( laughter ) no , but I mean , like , just because I be in a strip club parking lot do not mean that I be , like , a sexist or whatever . my fiancee be totally amazing , she be totally a strong girl , woman , smart woman , like , the whole thing .     yeah , she know I be here . she be probably at a strip club herself right now , like , as a joke , same as I .     my good man , I tell he he could surprise I , and he think this would be hilarious , but this be not something . yeah , we all go to b school together . wharton . ( laughter )     yeah , so , dude , can you guy — all right , but it be my bachelor party , and I can spend it in the parking lot with anderson cooper if I want to . all right , I 'll see you in there .     all right , okay , so anderson , so , like , first of all , strip , but then , like , all the other thing you be talk about , prostitution and all that stuff , that be , like , not the same thing at all . you know ? like , you keep call it the sex industry or whatever , but it be like , if the girl want to be an exotic dancer and she be 18 , like , that be her right .     whoa , whoa , I hear what you be say , but I just feel like people , they just want to make it seem like all dude be just , like , predator , that we would just automatically go to a prostitute , or whatever . even , like , when I pledge , you know , like when I rush my fraternity . my brother who I be close to , those guy , they be all like I . we be just normal people , but , like , there be this myth that you must be that guy who be kind of an asshole , and like , all bro before hos or whatever . and actually , like , bro before hos , it do not mean like what it sound like . it be actually just like a joking way of say that you care about your brother and you put they first .     yeah , but , you can not blame the medium , either . I mean , like , if you go watch " hangover 2 , " and you think that be an instruction manual for your life , like , I do not know what to tell you . you know ? you do not watch " bourne identity " and go drive your car over a gondola in venice . ( laughter )     well , yeah , okay , like , if you be a little kid or whatever , of course it be different , but —     yeah , all right , I remember one thing like that . I be at this kid 's house one time play gta , uh , grand theft auto ?     dude , be you from canada ? ( laughter )     so , like , whatever , with grand theft auto , you be this kid , like , you be this guy walk around or whatever , and you can basically , like , the more cop you kill , the more point you get , and stuff like that . but also , you can find prostitute and obviously you can do sexual stuff with they , but you can , like , kill they and take your money back . yeah , this kid , I remember he run over a couple of they a few time with his car and he get all these point . we be , like , 10 , I think . it feel pretty terrible , actually . no , I do not think I say anything , I just finish play and go home .     all right class , so then there be man who have more than just a pass relationship to this issue . ( laughter ) the next subject describe himself as a reform and remorseful pimp turn motivational speaker , life coach and therapist , but if you want to know more about he , you 'll have to come to the entire play .     thank you so much , you beautiful ted audience . I will see you for " sell / buy / date . "     ( applause )  
   along the ancient path of the monongahela river , braddock , pennsylvania sit in the eastern region of allegheny county , approximately nine mile outside of pittsburgh .     an industrial suburb , braddock be home to andrew carnegie 's first steel mill , the edgar thomson work . operate since 1875 , it be the last functioning steel mill in the region . for 12 year , I have produce collaborative portrait , still life , landscape and aerial view in order to build a visual archive to address the intersection of the steel industry , the environment , and the health care system 's impact on the body of my family and community .     the tradition and grand narrative of braddock be mostly comprise of story of industrialist and trade union . currently , the new narrative about braddock , a poster child for rust belt revitalization , be a story of urban pioneer discover a new frontier . mass medium have omit the fact that braddock be predominantly black . our existence have be co - opt , silence and erase .     fourth generation in a lineage of woman , I be raise under the protection and care of grandma ruby , off 8th street at 805 washington avenue . she work as a manager for goodwill . mom be a nurse 's aid . she watch the steel mill close and white flight to suburban development . by the time my generation walk the street , disinvestment at the local , state and federal level , erode infrastructure , and the war on drug dismantle my family and community .     grandma ruby 's stepfather gramp be one of few black man to retire from carnegie 's mill with his pension . he work in high temperature , tear down and rebuild furnace , clean up spilt metal and slag . the history of a place be write on the body and the landscape . area of heavy truck traffic , exposure to benzene and atomize metal , risk cancer and lupus . one hundred twenty - three licensed bed , 652 employee , rehabilitation program decimate . a housing discrimination lawsuit against allegheny county remove where the project talbot tower once stand . recent rezoning for more light industry have since appear . google map and google earth pixelation conceal the flammable waste be use to squeeze the bunn family off their home and land . in 2013 , I charter a helicopter with my camera to document this aggressive dispossession . in flight , my observation reveal thousand of plastic white bundle own by a conservation industry that claim it be eco - friendly and recycle million of tire to preserve people 's life and to improve people 's life .     my work spiral from the micro to the macro level , excavate hide history . recently , at the seattle art museum , isaac bunn and I mount this exhibition , and the exhibition be use as a platform to launch his voice . through reclamation of our narrative , we will continue to fight historic erasure and socioeconomic inequality .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   this be my great uncle , my father 's father 's young brother . his name be joe mckenna . he be a young husband and a semi - pro basketball player and a fireman in new york city . family history say he love be a fireman , and so in 1938 , on one of his day off , he elect to hang out at the firehouse . to make himself useful that day , he start polish all the brass , the railing on the fire truck , the fitting on the wall , and one of the fire hose nozzles , a giant , heavy piece of metal , topple off a shelf and hit he . a few day later , his shoulder start to hurt . two day after that , he spike a fever . the fever climb and climb . his wife be take care of he , but nothing she do make a difference , and when they get the local doctor in , nothing he do matter either .     they flag down a cab and take he to the hospital . the nurse there recognize right away that he have an infection , what at the time they would have call " blood poisoning , " and though they probably do not say it , they would have know right away that there be nothing they could do .     there be nothing they could do because the thing we use now to cure infection do not exist yet . the first test of penicillin , the first antibiotic , be three year in the future . people who get infection either recover , if they be lucky , or they die . my great uncle be not lucky . he be in the hospital for a week , shake with chill , dehydrate and delirious , sink into a coma as his organ fail . his condition grow so desperate that the people from his firehouse line up to give he transfusion hope to dilute the infection surge through his blood .     nothing work . he die . he be 30 year old .     if you look back through history , most people die the way my great uncle die . most people do not die of cancer or heart disease , the lifestyle disease that afflict we in the west today . they do not die of those disease because they do not live long enough to develop they . they die of injury — be gore by an ox , shoot on a battlefield , crush in one of the new factory of the industrial revolution — and most of the time from infection , which finish what those injury begin .     all of that change when antibiotic arrive . suddenly , infection that have be a death sentence become something you recover from in day . it seem like a miracle , and ever since , we have be live inside the golden epoch of the miracle drug .     and now , we be come to an end of it . my great uncle die in the last day of the pre - antibiotic era . we stand today on the threshold of the post - antibiotic era , in the early day of a time when simple infection such as the one joe have will kill people once again .     in fact , they already be . people be die of infection again because of a phenomenon call antibiotic resistance . briefly , it work like this . bacteria compete against each other for resource , for food , by manufacture lethal compound that they direct against each other . other bacteria , to protect themselves , evolve defense against that chemical attack . when we first make antibiotic , we take those compound into the lab and make our own version of they , and bacteria respond to our attack the way they always have .     here be what happen next : penicillin be distribute in 1943 , and widespread penicillin resistance arrive by 1945 . vancomycin arrive in 1972 , vancomycin resistance in 1988 . imipenem in 1985 , and resistance to in 1998 . daptomycin , one of the most recent drug , in 2003 , and resistance to it just a year later in 2004 .     for 70 year , we play a game of leapfrog — our drug and their resistance , and then another drug , and then resistance again — and now the game be end . bacteria develop resistance so quickly that pharmaceutical company have decide make antibiotic be not in their good interest , so there be infection move across the world for which , out of the more than 100 antibiotic available on the market , two drug might work with side effect , or one drug , or none .     this be what that look like . in 2000 , the center for disease control and prevention , the cdc , identify a single case in a hospital in north carolina of an infection resistant to all but two drug . today , that infection , know as kpc , have spread to every state but three , and to south america , europe and the middle east . in 2008 , doctor in sweden diagnose a man from india with a different infection resistant to all but one drug that time . the gene that create that resistance , know as ndm , have now spread from india into china , asia , africa , europe and canada , and the united states .     it would be natural to hope that these infection be extraordinary case , but in fact , in the united states and europe , 50,000 people a year die of infection which no drug can help . a project charter by the british government know as the review on antimicrobial resistance estimate that the worldwide toll right now be 700,000 death a year .     that be a lot of death , and yet , the chance be good that you do not feel at risk , that you imagine these people be hospital patient in intensive care unit or nursing home resident near the end of their life , people whose infection be remote from we , in situation we can not identify with .     what you do not think about , none of we do , be that antibiotic support almost all of modern life .     if we lose antibiotic , here be what else we would lose : first , any protection for people with weakened immune system — cancer patient , aid patient , transplant recipient , premature baby .     next , any treatment that install foreign object in the body : stent for stroke , pump for diabetes , dialysis , joint replacement . how many athletic baby boomer need new hip and knee ? a recent study estimate that without antibiotic , one out of ever six would die .     next , we would probably lose surgery . many operation be precede by prophylactic dose of antibiotic . without that protection , we would lose the ability to open the hide space of the body . so no heart operation , no prostate biopsy , no cesarean section . we would have to learn to fear infection that now seem minor . strep throat use to cause heart failure . skin infection lead to amputation . give birth kill , in the clean hospital , almost one woman out of every 100 . pneumonia take three child out of every 10 .     more than anything else , we would lose the confident way we live our everyday life . if you know that any injury could kill you , would you ride a motorcycle , bomb down a ski slope , climb a ladder to hang your christmas light , let your kid slide into home plate ? after all , the first person to receive penicillin , a british policeman name albert alexander , who be so ravage by infection that his scalp ooze pus and doctor have to take out an eye , be infect by do something very simple . he walk into his garden and scratch his face on a thorn . that british project I mention which estimate that the worldwide toll right now be 700,000 death a year also predict that if we can not get this under control by 2050 , not long , the worldwide toll will be 10 million death a year .     how do we get to this point where what we have to look forward to be those terrifying number ? the difficult answer be , we do it to ourselves . resistance be an inevitable biological process , but we bear the responsibility for accelerate it . we do this by squander antibiotic with a heedlessness that now seem shocking . penicillin be sell over the counter until the 1950 . in much of the develop world , most antibiotic still be . in the united states , 50 percent of the antibiotic give in hospital be unnecessary . forty - five percent of the prescription write in doctor 's office be for condition that antibiotic can not help . and that be just in healthcare . on much of the planet , most meat animal get antibiotic every day of their life , not to cure illness , but to fatten they up and to protect they against the factory farm condition they be raise in . in the united states , possibly 80 percent of the antibiotic sell every year go to farm animal , not to human , create resistant bacteria that move off the farm in water , in dust , in the meat the animal become . aquaculture depend on antibiotic too , particularly in asia , and fruit grow relie on antibiotic to protect apple , pear , citrus , against disease . and because bacteria can pass their dna to each other like a traveler hand off a suitcase at an airport , once we have encourage that resistance into existence , there be no know where it will spread .     this be predictable . in fact , it be predict by alexander fleming , the man who discover penicillin . he be give the nobel prize in 1945 in recognition , and in an interview shortly after , this be what he say :     " the thoughtless person play with penicillin treatment be morally responsible for the death of a man who succumb to infection with a pencillin - resistant organism . " he add , " I hope this evil can be avert . "     can we avert it ? there be company work on novel antibiotic , thing the superbug have never see before . we need those new drug badly , and we need incentive : discovery grant , extend patent , prize , to lure other company into make antibiotic again .     but that probably will not be enough . here be why : evolution always win . bacteria birth a new generation every 20 minute . it take pharmaceutical chemistry 10 year to derive a new drug . every time we use an antibiotic , we give the bacteria billion of chance to crack the code of the defense we 've construct . there have never yet be a drug they could not defeat .     this be asymmetric warfare , but we can change the outcome . we could build system to harvest datum to tell we automatically and specifically how antibiotic be be use . we could build gatekeepe into drug order system so that every prescription get a second look . we could require agriculture to give up antibiotic use . we could build surveillance system to tell we where resistance be emerge next .     those be the tech solution . they probably be not enough either , unless we help . antibiotic resistance be a habit . we all know how hard it be to change a habit . but as a society , we 've do that in the past . people use to toss litter into the street , use to not wear seatbelt , use to smoke inside public building . we do not do those thing anymore . we do not trash the environment or court devastating accident or expose other to the possibility of cancer , because we decide those thing be expensive , destructive , not in our good interest . we change social norm . we could change social norm around antibiotic use too .     I know that the scale of antibiotic resistance seem overwhelming , but if you 've ever buy a fluorescent lightbulb because you be concern about climate change , or read the label on a box of cracker because you think about the deforestation from palm oil , you already know what it feel like to take a tiny step to address an overwhelming problem . we could take those kind of step for antibiotic use too . we could forgo give an antibiotic if we be not sure it be the right one . we could stop insist on a prescription for our kid 's ear infection before we be sure what cause it . we could ask every restaurant , every supermarket , where their meat come from . we could promise each other never again to buy chicken or shrimp or fruit raise with routine antibiotic use , and if we do those thing , we could slow down the arrival of the post - antibiotic world .     but we have to do it soon . penicillin begin the antibiotic era in 1943 . in just 70 year , we walk ourselves up to the edge of disaster . we will not get 70 year to find our way back out again .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   when you be a child , anything and everything be possible . the challenge , so often , be hang on to that as we grow up . and as a four - year - old , I have the opportunity to sail for the first time .     I will never forget the excitement as we close the coast . I will never forget the feeling of adventure as I climb on board the boat and stare into her tiny cabin for the first time . but the most amazing feeling be the feeling of freedom , the feeling that I feel when we hoist her sail . as a four - year - old child , it be the great sense of freedom that I could ever imagine . I make my mind up there and then that one day , somehow , I be go to sail around the world .     so I do what I could in my life to get close to that dream . age 10 , it be save my school dinner money change . every single day for eight year , I have mash potato and baked bean , which cost 4p each , and gravy be free . every day I would pile up the change on the top of my money box , and when that pile reach a pound , I would drop it in and cross off one of the 100 square I would draw on a piece of paper . finally , I buy a tiny dinghy . I spend hour sit on it in the garden dreaming of my goal . I read every book I could on sailing , and then eventually , having be tell by my school I be not clever enough to be a vet , leave school age 17 to begin my apprenticeship in sailing .     so imagine how it feel just four year later to be sit in a boardroom in front of someone who I know could make that dream come true . I feel like my life depend on that moment , and incredibly , he say yes . and I could barely contain my excitement as I sit in that first design meeting design a boat on which I be go to sail solo nonstop around the world . from that first meeting to the finish line of the race , it be everything I would ever imagine . just like in my dream , there be amazing part and tough part . we miss an iceberg by 20 foot . nine time , I climb to the top of her 90 - foot mast . we be blow on our side in the southern ocean . but the sunset , the wildlife , and the remoteness be absolutely breathtaking . after three month at sea , age just 24 , I finish in second position . I would love it , so much so that within six month I decide to go around the world again , but this time not in a race : to try to be the fast person ever to sail solo nonstop around the world . now for this , I need a different craft : big , wide , fast , more powerful . just to give that boat some scale , I could climb inside her mast all the way to the top . seventy - five foot long , 60 foot wide . I affectionately call her moby . she be a multihull . when we build she , no one have ever make it solo nonstop around the world in one , though many have try , but whilst we build she , a frenchman take a boat 25 percent big than she and not only do he make it , but he take the record from 93 day right down to 72 . the bar be now much , much high .     and these boat be exciting to sail . this be a training sail off the french coast . this I know well because I be one of the five crew member on board . five second be all it take from everything be fine to our world go black as the window be thrust underwater , and that five second go quickly . just see how far below those guy the sea be . imagine that alone in the southern ocean plunge into icy water , thousand of mile away from land .     it be christmas day . I be forge into the southern ocean underneath australia . the condition be horrendous . I be approach a part in the ocean which be 2,000 mile away from the near town . the near land be antarctica , and the near people would be those man the european space station above I . ( laughter ) you really be in the middle of nowhere . if you need help , and you be still alive , it take four day for a ship to get to you and then four day for that ship to get you back to port . no helicopter can reach you out there , and no plane can land . we be forge ahead of a huge storm . within it , there be 80 knot of wind , which be far too much wind for the boat and I to cope with . the wave be already 40 to 50 foot high , and the spray from the break crest be blow horizontally like snow in a blizzard . if we do not sail fast enough , we would be engulf by that storm , and either capsize or smash to piece . we be quite literally hang on for our life and do so on a knife edge .     the speed I so desperately need bring with it danger . we all know what it be like drive a car 20 mile an hour , 30 , 40 . it be not too stressful . we can concentrate . we can turn on the radio . take that 50 , 60 , 70 , accelerate through to 80 , 90 , 100 mile an hour . now you have white knuckle and you be grip the steering wheel . now take that car off road at night and remove the windscreen wiper , the windscreen , the headlight and the brake . that be what it be like in the southern ocean . ( laughter ) ( applause ) you could imagine it would be quite difficult to sleep in that situation , even as a passenger . but you be not a passenger . you be alone on a boat you can barely stand up in , and you have to make every single decision on board . I be absolutely exhausted , physically and mentally . eight sail change in 12 hour . the mainsail weigh three time my body weight , and after each change , I would collapse on the floor soak with sweat with this freeze southern ocean air burn the back of my throat .     but out there , those low of the low be so often contrast with the high of the high . a few day later , we come out of the back of the low . against all odd , we would be able to drive ahead of the record within that depression . the sky clear , the rain stop , and our heartbeat , the monstrous sea around we be transform into the most beautiful moonlit mountain .     it be hard to explain , but you enter a different mode when you head out there . your boat be your entire world , and what you take with you when you leave be all you have . if I say to you all now , " go off into vancouver and find everything you will need for your survival for the next three month , " that be quite a task . that be food , fuel , clothe , even toilet roll and toothpaste . that be what we do , and when we leave we manage it down to the last drop of diesel and the last packet of food . no experience in my life could have give I a well understanding of the definition of the word " finite . " what we have out there be all we have . there be no more .     and never in my life have I ever translate that definition of finite that I would feel on board to anything outside of sailing until I step off the boat at the finish line having break that record .     ( applause )     suddenly I connect the dot . our global economy be no different . it be entirely dependent on finite material we only have once in the history of humanity . and it be a bit like see something you be not expect under a stone and have two choice : I either put that stone to one side and learn more about it , or I put that stone back and I carry on with my dream job of sail around the world .     I choose the first . I put it to one side and I begin a new journey of learning , speak to chief executive , expert , scientist , economist to try to understand just how our global economy work . and my curiosity take I to some extraordinary place .     this photo be take in the burner of a coal - fire power station . I be fascinate by coal , fundamental to our global energy need , but also very close to my family . my great - grandfather be a coal miner , and he spend 50 year of his life underground . this be a photo of he , and when you see that photo , you see someone from another era . no one wear trouser with a waistband quite that high in this day and age . ( laughter ) but yet , that be I with my great - grandfather , and by the way , they be not his real ear . ( laughter )     we be close . I remember sit on his knee listen to his mining story . he talk of the camaraderie underground , and the fact that the miner use to save the crust of their sandwich to give to the pony they work with underground . it be like it be yesterday . and on my journey of learning , I go to the world coal association website , and there in the middle of the homepage , it say , " we have about 118 year of coal left . " and I think to myself , well , that be well outside my lifetime , and a much great figure than the prediction for oil . but I do the math , and I realize that my great - grandfather have be bear exactly 118 year before that year , and I sit on his knee until I be 11 year old , and I realize it be nothing in time , nor in history . and it make I make a decision I never think I would make : to leave the sport of solo sailing behind I and focus on the great challenge I would ever come across : the future of our global economy .     and I quickly realize it be not just about energy . it be also material . in 2008 , I pick up a scientific study look at how many year we have of valuable material to extract from the ground : copper , 61 ; tin , zinc , 40 ; silver , 29 . these figure could not be exact , but we know those material be finite . we only have they once . and yet , our speed that we 've use these material have increase rapidly , exponentially . with more people in the world with more stuff , we 've effectively see 100 year of price decline in those basic commodity erase in just 10 year . and this affect all of we . it be bring huge volatility in price , so much so that in 2011 , your average european car manufacturer see a raw material price increase of 500 million euro , wipe away half their operating profit through something they have absolutely no control over .     and the more I learn , the more I start to change my own life . I start travel less , do less , use less . it feel like actually do less be what we have to do . but it sit uneasy with I . it do not feel right . it feel like we be buy ourselves time . we be eke thing out a bit long . even if everybody change , it would not solve the problem . it would not fix the system . it be vital in the transition , but what fascinate I be , in the transition to what ? what could actually work ?     it strike I that the system itself , the framework within which we live , be fundamentally flaw , and I realize ultimately that our operating system , the way our economy function , the way our economy be be build , be a system in itself . at sea , I have to understand complex system . I have to take multiple input , I have to process they , and I have to understand the system to win . I have to make sense of it . and as I look at our global economy , I realize it too be that system , but it be a system that effectively can not run in the long term .     and I realize we 've be perfect what be effectively a linear economy for 150 year , where we take a material out of the ground , we make something out of it , and then ultimately that product gets throw away , and yes , we do recycle some of it , but more an attempt to get out what we can at the end , not by design . it be an economy that fundamentally can not run in the long term , and if we know that we have finite material , why would we build an economy that would effectively use thing up , that would create waste ? life itself have exist for billion of year and have continually adapt to use material effectively . it be a complex system , but within it , there be no waste . everything be metabolize . it be not a linear economy at all , but circular .     and I feel like the child in the garden . for the first time on this new journey , I could see exactly where we be head . if we could build an economy that would use thing rather than use they up , we could build a future that really could work in the long term . I be excited . this be something to work towards . we know exactly where we be head . we just have to work out how to get there , and it be exactly with this in mind that we create the ellen macarthur foundation in september 2010 .     many school of thought feed our thinking and point to this model : industrial symbiosis , performance economy , share economy , biomimicry , and of course , cradle - to - cradle design . material would be define as either technical or biological , waste would be design out entirely , and we would have a system that could function absolutely in the long term .     so what could this economy look like ? maybe we would not buy light fitting , but we would pay for the service of light , and the manufacturer would recover the material and change the light fitting when we have more efficient product . what if packaging be so nontoxic it could dissolve in water and we could ultimately drink it ? it would never become waste . what if engine be re - manufacturable , and we could recover the component material and significantly reduce energy demand . what if we could recover component from circuit board , reutilize they , and then fundamentally recover the material within they through a second stage ? what if we could collect food waste , human waste ? what if we could turn that into fertilizer , heat , energy , ultimately reconnecte nutrient system and rebuild natural capital ? and car — what we want be to move around . we do not need to own the material within they . could car become a service and provide we with mobility in the future ? all of this sound amazing , but these be not just idea , they be real today , and these lie at the forefront of the circular economy . what lie before we be to expand they and scale they up .     so how would you shift from linear to circular ? well , the team and I at the foundation think you might want to work with the top university in the world , with lead business within the world , with the big convening platform in the world , and with government . we think you might want to work with the good analyst and ask they the question , " can the circular economy decouple growth from resource constraint ? be the circular economy able to rebuild natural capital ? could the circular economy replace current chemical fertilizer use ? " yes be the answer to the decoupling , but also yes , we could replace current fertilizer use by a staggering 2.7 time . but what inspire I most about the circular economy be its ability to inspire young people . when young people see the economy through a circular lens , they see brand new opportunity on exactly the same horizon . they can use their creativity and knowledge to rebuild the entire system , and it be there for the taking right now , and the fast we do this , the well .     so could we achieve this in their lifetime ? be it actually possible ? I believe yes . when you look at the lifetime of my great - grandfather , anything be possible . when he be bear , there be only 25 car in the world ; they have only just be invent . when he be 14 , we fly for the first time in history . now there be 100,000 charter flight every single day . when he be 45 , we build the first computer . many say it would not catch on , but it do , and just 20 year later we turn it into a microchip of which there will be thousand in this room here today . ten year before he die , we build the first mobile phone . it be not that mobile , to be fair , but now it really be , and as my great - grandfather leave this earth , the internet arrive . now we can do anything , but more importantly , now we have a plan .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   about 10 year ago , I go through a little bit of a hard time . so I decide to go see a therapist . I have be see she for a few month , when she look at I one day and say , " who actually raise you until you be three ? " seem like a weird question . I say , " my parent . " and she say , " I do not think that be actually the case ; because if it be , we would be deal with thing that be far more complicated than just this . "     it sound like the setup to a joke , but I know she be serious . because when I first start see she , I be try to be the funniest person in the room . and I would try and crack these joke , but she catch on to I really quickly , and whenever I try to make a joke , she would look at I and say , " that be actually really sad . " ( laughter ) it be terrible .     so I know I have to be serious , and I ask my parent who have actually raise I until I be three ? and to my surprise , they say my primary caregiver have be a distant relative of the family . I have call she my auntie .     I remember my auntie so clearly , it feel like she have be part of my life when I be much old . I remember the thick , straight hair , and how it would come around I like a curtain when she bend to pick I up ; her soft , southern thai accent ; the way I would cling to she , even if she just want to go to the bathroom or get something to eat . I love she , but [ with ] the ferocity that a child have sometimes before she understand that love also require let go .     but my clear and sharp memory of my auntie , be also one of my first memory of life at all . I remember she be beat and slap by another member of my family . I remember scream hysterically and want it to stop , as I do every single time it happen , for thing as minor as want to go out with her friend , or be a little late . I become so hysterical over her treatment , that eventually , she be just beat behind closed door .     thing get so bad for she that eventually she run away . as an adult , I learn later that she have be just 19 when she be bring over from thailand to the state to care for I , on a tourist visa . she wind up work in illinois for a time , before eventually return to thailand , which be where I run into she again , at a political rally in bangkok . I cling to she again , as I have when I be a child , and I let go , and then I promise that I would call . I never do , though . because I be afraid if I say everything that she mean to I — that I owe perhaps the good part of who I become to her care , and that the word " I be sorry " be like a thimble to bail out all the guilt and shame and rage I feel over everything she have endure to care for I for as long as she have — I think if I say those word to she , I would never stop cry again . because she have save I . and I have not save she .     I be a journalist , and I 've be write and research human trafficking for the past eight year or so , and even so , I never put together this personal story with my professional life until pretty recently . I think this profound disconnect actually symbolize most of our understanding about human trafficking . because human trafficking be far more prevalent , complex and close to home than most of we realize .     I spend time in jail and brothel , interview hundred of survivor and law enforcement , ngo worker . and when I think about what we 've do about human trafficking , I be hugely disappointed . partly because we do not even talk about the problem right at all . when I say " human trafficking , " most of you probably do not think about someone like my auntie . you probably think about a young girl or woman , who be be brutally force into prostitution by a violent pimp . that be real suffering , and that be a real story . that story make I angry for far more than just the reality of that situation , though .     as a journalist , I really care about how we relate to each other through language , and the way we tell that story , with all the gory , violent detail , the salacious aspect — I call that " look at her scar " journalism . we use that story to convince ourselves that human trafficking be a bad man do a bad thing to an innocent girl . that story let we off the hook . it take you all the societal context that we might be indict for , for the structural inequality , or the poverty , or the barrier to migration . we let ourselves think that human trafficking be only about force prostitution , when in reality , human trafficking be embed in our everyday life .     let I show you what I mean . force prostitution account for 22 percent of human trafficking . ten percent be in state- impose force labor . but a whopping 68 percent be for the purpose of create the good and deliver the service that most of we rely on every day , in sector like agricultural work , domestic work and construction . that be food and care and shelter . and somehow , these most essential worker be also among the world 's most underpaid and exploit today . human trafficking be the use of force , fraud or coercion to compel another person 's labor . and it be find in cotton field , and coltan mine , and even car wash in norway and england . it be find in u.s . military basis in iraq and afghanistan .     it be find in thailand 's fishing industry . that country have become the large exporter of shrimp in the world . but what be the circumstance behind all that cheap and plentiful shrimp ? thai military be catch sell burmese and cambodian migrant onto fishing boat . those fishing boat be take out , the man put to work , and they be throw overboard if they make the mistake of fall sick , or try to resist their treatment . those fish be then use to feed shrimp , the shrimp be then sell to four major global retailer : costco , tesco , walmart and carrefour .     human trafficking be find on a small scale than just that , and in place you would never even imagine . trafficker have force young people to drive ice cream truck , or to sing in tour boy ' choir . trafficking have even be find in a hair braid salon in new jersey .     the scheme in that case be incredible . the trafficker find young family who be from ghana and togo , and they tell these family that " your daughter be go to get a fine education in the united states . " they then locate winner of the green card lottery , and they tell they , " we 'll help you out . we 'll get you a plane ticket . we 'll pay your fee . all you have to do be take this young girl with you , say that she be your sister or your spouse . once everyone arrive in new jersey , the young girl be take away , and put to work for 14 - hour day , seven day a week , for five year . they make their trafficker nearly four million dollar .     this be a huge problem . so what have we do about it ? we 've mostly turn to the criminal justice system . but keep in mind , most victim of human trafficking be poor and marginalize . they be migrant , people of color . sometimes they be in the sex trade . and for population like these , the criminal justice system be too often part of the problem , rather than the solution . in study after study , in country range from bangladesh to the united states , between 20 and 60 percent of the people in the sex trade who be survey say that they have be rape or assault by the police in the past year alone . people in prostitution , include people who have be traffic into it , regularly receive multiple conviction for prostitution . have that criminal record make it so much more difficult to leave poverty , leave abuse , or leave prostitution , if that person so desire . worker outside of the sex sector — if they try and resist their treatment , they risk deportation . in case after case I 've study , employer have no problem call on law enforcement to try and threaten or deport their striking traffic worker . if those worker run away , they risk become part of the great mass of undocumented worker who be also subject to the whim of law enforcement if they be catch .     law enforcement be suppose to identify victim and prosecute trafficker . but out of an estimate 21 million victim of human trafficking in the world , they have help and identify few than 50,000 people . that be like compare the population of the world to the population of los angeles , proportionally speak . as for conviction , out of an estimate 5,700 conviction in 2013 , few than 500 be for labor trafficking . keep in mind that labor trafficking account for 68 percent of all trafficking , but few than 10 percent of the conviction .     I 've hear one expert say that trafficking happen where need meet greed . I would like to add one more element to that . trafficking happen in sector where worker be exclude from protection , and deny the right to organize . trafficking do not happen in a vacuum . it happen in systematically degraded work environment . you might be think , oh , she be talk about fail state , or war - tear state , or — I be actually talk about the united states . let I tell you what that look like .     I spend many month research a trafficking case call global horizon , involve hundred of thai farm worker . they be send all over the state , to work in hawaii pineapple plantation , and washington apple orchard , and anywhere the work be need . they be promise three year of solid agricultural work . so they make a calculated risk . they sell their land , they sell their wife ' jewelry , to make thousand in recruitment fee for this company , global horizon . but once they be bring over , their passport be confiscate . some of the man be beat and hold at gunpoint . they work so hard they faint in the field . this case hit I so hard .     after I come back home , I be wander through the grocery store , and I freeze in the produce department . I be remember the over - the - top meal the global horizon survivor would make for I every time I show up to interview they . they finish one meal with this plate of perfect , long - stem strawberry , and as they hand they to I , they say , " be not these the kind of strawberry you eat with somebody special in the state ? and do not they taste so much well when you know the people whose hand pick they for you ? "     as I stand in that grocery store week later , I realize I have no idea of who to thank for this plenty , and no idea of how they be be treat . so , like the journalist I be , I start dig into the agricultural sector . and I find there be too many field , and too few labor inspector . I find multiple layer of plausible deniability between grower and distributor and processor , and god know who else . the global horizon survivor have be bring to the state on a temporary guest worker program . that guest worker program tie a person 's legal status to his or her employer , and deny that worker the right to organize . mind you , none of what I be describe about this agricultural sector or the guest worker program be actually human trafficking . it be merely what we find legally tolerable . and I would argue this be fertile ground for exploitation . and all of this have be hide to I , before I have try to understand it .     I be not the only person grapple with these issue . pierre omidyar , founder of ebay , be one of the big anti - trafficking philanthropist in the world . and even he wind up accidentally invest nearly 10 million dollar in the pineapple plantation cite as have the bad working condition in that global horizon case . when he find out , he and his wife be shock and horrified , and they wound up write an op - ed for a newspaper , say that it be up to all of we to learn everything we can about the labor and supply chain of the product that we support . I totally agree .     what would happen if each one of we decide that we be no long go to support company if they do not eliminate exploitation from their labor and supply chain ? if we demand law call for the same ? if all the ceo out there decide that they be go to go through their business and say , " no more " ? if we end recruitment fee for migrant worker ? if we decide that guest worker should have the right to organize without fear of retaliation ? these would be decision hear around the world . this be not a matter of buy a fair - trade peach and call it a day , buy a guilt - free zone with your money . that be not how it work . this be the decision to change a system that be break , and that we have unwittingly but willingly allow ourselves to profit from and benefit from for too long .     we often dwell on human trafficking survivor ' victimization . but that be not my experience of they . over all the year that I 've be talk to they , they have teach I that we be more than our bad day . each one of we be more than what we have live through . especially traffic survivor . these people be the most resourceful and resilient and responsible in their community . they be the people that you would take a gamble on . you would say , I be gong to sell my ring , because I have the chance to send you off to a well future . they be the emissary of hope .     these survivor do not need saving . they need solidarity , because they be behind some of the most exciting social justice movement out there today . the nanny and housekeeper who march with their family and their employer ' family — their activism get we an international treaty on domestic worker ' right . the nepali woman who be traffic into the sex trade — they come together , and they decide that they be go to make the world 's first anti - trafficking organization actually head and run by traffic survivor themselves . these indian shipyard worker be traffic to do post - hurricane katrina reconstruction . they be threaten with deportation , but they break out of their work compound and they march from new orleans to washington , d.c . , to protest labor exploitation . they cofounde an organization call the national guest worker alliance , and through this organization , they have wind up help other worker bring to light exploitation and abuse in supply chain in walmart and hershey 's factory . and although the department of justice decline to take their case , a team of civil right lawyer win the first of a dozen civil suit this february , and get their client 14 million dollar .     these survivor be fight for people they do not even know yet , other worker , and for the possibility of a just world for all of we . this be our chance to do the same . this be our chance to make the decision that tell we who we be , as a people and as a society ; that our prosperity be no long prosperity , as long as it be pin to other people 's pain ; that our life be inextricably weave together ; and that we have the power to make a different choice .     I be so reluctant to share my story of my auntie with you . before I start this ted process and climb up on this stage , I have tell literally a handful of people about it , because , like many a journalist , I be far more interested in learn about your story than share much , if anything , about my own . I also have not do my journalistic due diligence on this . I have not issue my mountain of document request , and interview everyone and their mother , and I have not find my auntie yet . I do not know her story of what happen , and of her life now . the story as I 've tell it to you be messy and unfinished . but I think it mirror the messy and unfinished situation we be all in , when it come to human trafficking . we be all implicate in this problem . but that mean we be all also part of its solution . figure out how to build a more just world be our work to do , and our story to tell . so let we tell it the way we should have do , from the very beginning . let we tell this story together .     thank you so much .     ( applause )  
   for the past decade , I 've be study non - state armed group : armed organization like terrorist , insurgent or militia . I document what these group do when they be not shoot . my goal be to well understand these violent actor and to study way to encourage transition from violent engagement to nonviolent confrontation . I work in the field , in the policy world and in the library .     understand non - state armed group be key to solve most ongoing conflict , because war have change . it use to be a contest between state . no long . it be now a conflict between state and non - state actor . for example , of the 216 peace agreement sign between 1975 and 2011 , 196 of they be between a state and a non - state actor . so we need to understand these group ; we need to either engage they or defeat they in any conflict resolution process that have to be successful .     so how do we do that ? we need to know what make these organization tick . we know a lot about how they fight , why they fight , but no one look at what they be do when they be not fight . yet , armed struggle and unarmed politic be relate . it be all part of the same organization . we can not understand these group , let alone defeat they , if we do not have the full picture .     and armed group today be complex organization . take the lebanese hezbollah , know for its violent confrontation against israel . but since its creation in the early 1980s , hezbollah have also set up a political party , a social - service network , and a military apparatus . similarly , the palestinian hamas , know for its suicide attack against israel , also run the gaza strip since 2007 . so these group do way more than just shoot . they multi - task . they set up complex communication machine — radio station , tv channel , internet website and social medium strategy . and up here , you have the isis magazine , print in english and publish to recruit . armed group also invest in complex fund - raising — not loot , but set up profitable business ; for example , construction company . now , these activity be key . they allow these group to increase their strength , increase their fund , to well recruit and to build their brand .     armed group also do something else : they build strong bond with the population by invest in social service . they build school , they run hospital , they set up vocational - training program or micro - loan program . hezbollah offer all of these service and more . armed group also seek to win the population over by offer something that the state be not provide : safety and security . the initial rise of the taliban in war - tear afghanistan , or even the beginning of the ascent of isis , can be understand also by look at these group ' effort to provide security . now , unfortunately , in these case , the provision of security come at an unbearably high price for the population . but in general , provide social service fill a gap , a governance gap leave by the government , and allow these group to increase their strength and their power . for example , the 2006 electoral victory of the palestinian hamas can not be understand without acknowledge the group 's social work .     now , this be a really complex picture , yet in the west , when we look at armed group , we only think of the violent side . but that be not enough to understand these group ' strength , strategy or long - term vision . these group be hybrid . they rise because they fill a gap leave by the government , and they emerge to be both armed and political , engage in violent struggle and provide governance .     and the more these organization be complex and sophisticated , the less we can think of they as the opposite of a state . now , what do you call a group like hezbollah ? they run part of a territory , they administer all their function , they pick up the garbage , they run the sewage system . be this a state ? be it a rebel group ? or maybe something else , something different and new ? and what about isis ? the line be blur . we live in a world of state , non - state , and in - between , and the more state be weak , like in the middle east today , the more non - state actor step in and fill that gap . this matter for government , because to counter these group , they will have to invest more in non - military tool . fill that governance gap have to be at the center of any sustainable approach . this also matter very much for peacemaking and peacebuilding . if we well understand armed group , we will well know what incentive to offer to encourage the transition from violence to nonviolence .     so in this new contest between state and non - state , military power can win some battle , but it will not give we peace nor stability . to achieve these objective , what we need be a long - term investment in fill that security gap , in fill that governance gap that allow these group to thrive in the first place .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   what do you do when you have a headache ? you swallow an aspirin . but for this pill to get to your head , where the pain be , it go through your stomach , intestine and various other organ first .     swallow pill be the most effective and painless way of deliver any medication in the body . the downside , though , be that swallow any medication lead to its dilution . and this be a big problem , particularly in hiv patient . when they take their anti - hiv drug , these drug be good for lower the virus in the blood , and increase the cd4 cell count . but they be also notorious for their adverse side effect , but mostly bad , because they get dilute by the time they get to the blood , and bad , by the time they get to the site where it matter most : within the hiv viral reservoir . these area in the body — such as the lymph node , the nervous system , as well as the lung — where the virus be sleep , and will not readily get deliver in the blood of patient that be under consistent anti - hiv drug therapy . however , upon discontinuation of therapy , the virus can awake and infect new cell in the blood .     now , all this be a big problem in treat hiv with the current drug treatment , which be a life - long treatment that must be swallow by patient . one day , I sit and think , " can we deliver anti - hiv directly within its reservoir site , without the risk of drug dilution ? " as a laser scientist , the answer be just before my eye : laser , of course . if they can be use for dentistry , for diabetic wound - healing and surgery , they can be use for anything imaginable , include transport drug into cell .     as a matter of fact , we be currently use laser pulse to poke or drill extremely tiny hole , which open and close almost immediately in hiv - infect cell , in order to deliver drug within they . " how be that possible ? " you may ask . well , we shine a very powerful but super - tiny laser beam onto the membrane of hiv - infect cell while these cell be immerse in liquid contain the drug . the laser pierce the cell , while the cell swallow the drug in a matter of microsecond . before you even know it , the induce hole becomes immediately repair .     now , we be currently test this technology in test tube or in petri dish , but the goal be to get this technology in the human body , apply it in the human body . " how be that possible ? " you may ask . well , the answer be : through a three - head device . use the first head , which be our laser , we will make an incision in the site of infection . use the second head , which be a camera , we meander to the site of infection . finally , use a third head , which be a drug - spread sprinkler , we deliver the drug directly at the site of infection , while the laser be again use to poke those cell open .     well , this might not seem like much right now . but one day , if successful , this technology can lead to complete eradication of hiv in the body . yes . a cure for hiv . this be every hiv researcher 's dream — in our case , a cure lead by laser .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   two twin dome , two radically oppose design culture . one be make of thousand of steel part , the other of a single silk thread . one be synthetic , the other organic . one be impose on the environment , the other create it . one be design for nature , the other be design by she .     michelangelo say that when he look at raw marble , he see a figure struggle to be free . the chisel be michelangelo 's only tool . but live thing be not chisel . they grow . and in our small unit of life , our cell , we you all the information that be require for every other cell to function and to replicate .     tool also have consequence . at least since the industrial revolution , the world of design have be dominate by the rigor of manufacturing and mass production . assembly line have dictate a world make of part , frame the imagination of designer and architect who have be train to think about their object as assembly of discrete part with distinct function .     but you do not find homogenous material assembly in nature . take human skin , for example . our facial skin be thin with large pore . our back skin be thick , with small pore . one act mainly as filter , the other mainly as barrier , and yet it be the same skin : no part , no assembly . it be a system that gradually vary its functionality by vary elasticity . so here this be a split screen to represent my split world view , the split personality of every designer and architect operate today between the chisel and the gene , between machine and organism , between assembly and growth , between henry ford and charles darwin . these two worldview , my left brain and right brain , analysis and synthesis , will play out on the two screen behind I . my work , at its simple level , be about unite these two worldview , move away from assembly and close into growth .     you be probably ask yourself : why now ? why be this not possible 10 or even five year ago ? we live in a very special time in history , a rare time , a time when the confluence of four field be give designer access to tool we 've never have access to before . these field be computational design , allow we to design complex form with simple code ; additive manufacturing , let we produce part by add material rather than carve it out ; material engineering , which let we design the behavior of material in high resolution ; and synthetic biology , enable we to design new biological functionality by edit dna . and at the intersection of these four field , my team and I create . please meet the mind and hand of my student .     we design object and product and structure and tool across scale , from the large - scale , like this robotic arm with an 80 - foot diameter reach with a vehicular base that will one day soon print entire building , to nanoscale graphic make entirely of genetically engineer microorganism that glow in the dark . here we 've reimagine the mashrabiya , an archetype of ancient arabic architecture , and create a screen where every aperture be uniquely sized to shape the form of light and heat move through it .     in our next project , we explore the possibility of create a cape and skirt — this be for a paris fashion show with iris van herpen — like a second skin that be make of a single part , stiff at the contour , flexible around the waist . together with my long - term 3d print collaborator stratasy , we 3d - print this cape and skirt with no seam between the cell , and I 'll show more object like it . this helmet combine stiff and soft material in 20 - micron resolution . this be the resolution of a human hair . it be also the resolution of a ct scanner . that designer have access to such high - resolution analytic and synthetic tool , enable to design product that fit not only the shape of our body , but also the physiological makeup of our tissue . next , we design an acoustic chair , a chair that would be at once structural , comfortable and would also absorb sound . professor carter , my collaborator , and I turn to nature for inspiration , and by design this irregular surface pattern , it become sound - absorbent . we print its surface out of 44 different property , vary in rigidity , opacity and color , correspond to pressure point on the human body . its surface , as in nature , vary its functionality not by add another material or another assembly , but by continuously and delicately vary material property .     but be nature ideal ? be there no part in nature ? I be not raise in a religious jewish home , but when I be young , my grandmother use to tell I story from the hebrew bible , and one of they stick with I and come to define much of what I care about . as she recount : " on the third day of creation , god command the earth to grow a fruit - bear fruit tree . " for this first fruit tree , there be to be no differentiation between trunk , branch , leave and fruit . the whole tree be a fruit . instead , the land grow tree that have bark and stem and flower . the land create a world make of part . I often ask myself , " what would design be like if object be make of a single part ? would we return to a well state of creation ? "     so we look for that biblical material , that fruit - bear fruit tree kind of material , and we find it . the second - most abundant biopolymer on the planet be call chitin , and some 100 million ton of it be produce every year by organism such as shrimp , crab , scorpion and butterfly . we think if we could tune its property , we could generate structure that be multifunctional out of a single part . so that be what we do . we call legal seafood —     ( laughter )     we order a bunch of shrimp shell , we grind they and we produce chitosan paste . by vary chemical concentration , we be able to achieve a wide array of property — from dark , stiff and opaque , to light , soft and transparent . in order to print the structure in large scale , we build a robotically control extrusion system with multiple nozzle . the robot would vary material property on the fly and create these 12 - foot - long structure make of a single material , 100 percent recyclable . when the part be ready , they be leave to dry and find a form naturally upon contact with air . so why be we still design with plastic ? the air bubble that be a byproduct of the printing process be use to contain photosynthetic microorganism that first appear on our planet 3.5 billion year ago , as we learn yesterday . together with our collaborator at harvard and mit , we embed bacteria that be genetically engineer to rapidly capture carbon from the atmosphere and convert it into sugar . for the first time , we be able to generate structure that would seamlessly transition from beam to mesh , and if scale even large , to window . a fruit - bear fruit tree . work with an ancient material , one of the first lifeform on the planet , plenty of water and a little bit of synthetic biology , we be able to transform a structure make of shrimp shell into an architecture that behave like a tree . and here be the good part : for object design to biodegrade , put they in the sea , and they will nourish marine life ; place they in soil , and they will help grow a tree .     the setting for our next exploration use the same design principle be the solar system . we look for the possibility of create life - sustain clothing for interplanetary voyage . to do that , we need to contain bacteria and be able to control their flow . so like the periodic table , we come up with our own table of the element : new lifeform that be computationally grow , additively manufacture and biologically augment . I like to think of synthetic biology as liquid alchemy , only instead of transmute precious metal , you be synthesize new biological functionality inside very small channel . it be call microfluidic . we 3d - print our own channel in order to control the flow of these liquid bacterial culture . in our first piece of clothing , we combine two microorganism . the first be cyanobacteria . it live in our ocean and in freshwater pond . and the second , e. coli , the bacterium that inhabit the human gut . one convert light into sugar , the other consume that sugar and produce biofuel useful for the build environment . now , these two microorganism never interact in nature . in fact , they never meet each other . they 've be here , engineer for the first time , to have a relationship inside a piece of clothing . think of it as evolution not by natural selection , but evolution by design . in order to contain these relationship , we 've create a single channel that resemble the digestive tract , that will help flow these bacteria and alter their function along the way . we then start grow these channel on the human body , vary material property accord to the desire functionality . where we want more photosynthesis , we would design more transparent channel . this wearable digestive system , when it be stretch end to end , span 60 meter . this be half the length of a football field , and 10 time as long as our small intestine . and here it be for the first time unveil at ted — our first photosynthetic wearable , liquid channel glow with life inside a wearable clothing .     ( applause )     thank you .     mary shelley say , " we be unfashioned creature , but only half make up . " what if design could provide that other half ? what if we could create structure that would augment live matter ? what if we could create personal microbiome that would scan our skin , repair damage tissue and sustain our body ? think of this as a form of edited biology . this entire collection , wanderer , that be name after planet , be not to I really about fashion per se , but it provide an opportunity to speculate about the future of our race on our planet and beyond , to combine scientific insight with lot of mystery and to move away from the age of the machine to a new age of symbiosis between our body , the microorganism that we inhabit , our product and even our building . I call this material ecology .     to do this , we always need to return back to nature . by now , you know that a 3d printer print material in layer . you also know that nature do not . it grow . it add with sophistication . this silkworm cocoon , for example , create a highly sophisticated architecture , a home inside which to metamorphisize . no additive manufacturing today get even close to this level of sophistication . it do so by combine not two material , but two protein in different concentration . one act as the structure , the other be the glue , or the matrix , hold those fiber together . and this happen across scale . the silkworm first attach itself to the environment — it create a tensile structure — and it then start spin a compressive cocoon . tension and compression , the two force of life , manifest in a single material .     in order to well understand how this complex process work , we glue a tiny earth magnet to the head of a silkworm , to the spinneret . we place it inside a box with magnetic sensor , and that allow we to create this 3 - dimensional point cloud and visualize the complex architecture of the silkworm cocoon . however , when we place the silkworm on a flat patch , not inside a box , we realize it would spin a flat cocoon and it would still healthily metamorphisize . so we start design different environment , different scaffold , and we discover that the shape , the composition , the structure of the cocoon , be directly inform by the environment .     silkworm be often boil to death inside their cocoon , their silk unravel and use in the textile industry . we realize that design these template allow we to give shape to raw silk without boil a single cocoon .     ( applause )     they would healthily metamorphisize , and we would be able to create these thing .     so we scale this process up to architectural scale . we have a robot spin the template out of silk , and we place it on our site . we know silkworm migrate toward dark and cold area , so we use a sun path diagram to reveal the distribution of light and heat on our structure . we then create hole , or aperture , that would lock in the ray of light and heat , distribute those silkworm on the structure .     we be ready to receive the caterpillar . we order 6,500 silkworm from an online silk farm . and after four week of feeding , they be ready to spin with we . we place they carefully at the bottom rim of the scaffold , and as they spin they pupate , they mate , they lay egg , and life begin all over again — just like we but much , much short .     bucky fuller say that tension be the great integrity , and he be right . as they spin biological silk over robotically spin silk , they give this entire pavilion its integrity . and over two to three week , 6,500 silkworm spin 6,500 kilometer . in a curious symmetry , this be also the length of the silk road . the moth , after they hatch , produce 1.5 million egg . this could be use for 250 additional pavilion for the future .     so here they be , the two worldview . one spin silk out of a robotic arm , the other fill in the gap .     if the final frontier of design be to breathe life into the product and the building around we , to form a two - material ecology , then designer must unite these two worldview . which bring we back , of course , to the beginning . here be to a new age of design , a new age of creation , that take we from a nature - inspire design to a design - inspire nature , and that demand of we for the first time that we mother nature .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you very much . thank you .     ( applause )  
   now ... let us go back in time . it be 1974 . there be the gallery somewhere in the world , and there be a young girl , age 23 , stand in the middle of the space . in the front of she be a table . on the table there be 76 object for pleasure and for pain . some of the object be a glass of water , a coat , a shoe , a rose . but also the knife , the razor blade , the hammer and the pistol with one bullet . there be instruction which say , " I be an object . you can use everything on the table on I . I be take all responsibility — even kill I . and the time be six hour . "     the beginning of this performance be easy . people would give I the glass of water to drink , they would give I the rose . but very soon after , there be a man who take the scissor and cut my clothe , and then they take the thorn of the rose and stick they in my stomach . somebody take the razor blade and cut my neck and drink the blood , and I still have the scar . the woman would tell the man what to do . and the man do not rape I because it be just a normal opening , and it be all public , and they be with their wife . they carry I around and put I on the table , and put the knife between my leg . and somebody take the pistol and bullet and put it against my temple . and another person take the pistol and they start a fight .     and after six hour be finish , I ... start walk towards the public . I be a mess . I be half - naked , I be full of blood and tear be run down my face . and everybody escape , they just run away . they could not confront myself , with myself as a normal human being . and then — what happen be I go to the hotel , it be at two in the morning . and I look at myself in the mirror , and I have a piece of gray hair . alright — please take off your blindfold .     welcome to the performance world . first of all , let us explain what the performance be . so many artist , so many different explanation , but my explanation for performance be very simple . performance be a mental and physical construction that the performer make in a specific time in a space in front of an audience and then energy dialogue happen . the audience and the performer make the piece together . and the difference between performance and theater be huge . in the theater , the knife be not a knife and the blood be just ketchup . in the performance , the blood be the material , and the razor blade or knife be the tool . it be all about be there in the real time , and you can not rehearse performance , because you can not do many of these type of thing twice — ever . which be very important , the performance be — you know , all human being be always afraid of very simple thing . we be afraid of suffering , we be afraid of pain , we be afraid of mortality . so what I be do — I be stage these kind of fear in front of the audience . I be use your energy , and with this energy I can go and push my body as far as I can . and then I liberate myself from these fear . and I be your mirror . if I can do this for myself , you can do it for you .     after belgrade , where I be bear , I go to amsterdam . and you know , I 've be do performance since the last 40 year . and here I meet ulay , and he be the person I actually fall in love with . and we make , for 12 year , performance together . you know the knife and the pistol and the bullet , I exchange into love and trust . so to do this kind work you have to trust the person completely because this arrow be point to my heart . so , heart beating and adrenaline be rush and so on , be about trust , be about total trust to another human being .     our relationship be 12 year , and we work on so many subject , both male and female energy . and as every relationship come to an end , ours go too . we do not make phone call like normal human being do and say , you know , " this be over . " we walk the great wall of china to say goodbye . I start at the yellow sea , and he start from the gobi desert . we walk , each of we , three month , two and a half thousand kilometer . it be the mountain , it be difficult . it be climb , it be ruin . it be , you know , go through the 12 chinese province , this be before china be open in ' 87 . and we succeed to meet in the middle to say goodbye . and then our relationship stop .     and now , it completely change how I see the public . and one very important piece I make in those day be " balkan baroque . " and this be the time of the balkan war , and I want to create some very strong , charismatic image , something that could serve for any war at any time , because the balkan war be now finish , but there be always some war , somewhere . so here I be wash two and a half thousand dead , big , bloody cow bone . you can not wash the blood , you never can wash shame off the war . so I be wash this six hour , six day , and war be come off these bone , and become possible — an unbearable smell . but then something stay in the memory .     I want to show you the one who really change my life , and this be the performance in moma , which I just recently make . this performance — when I say to the curator , " I be just go to sit at the chair , and there will be an empty chair at the front , and anybody from the public can come and sit as long as they want . " the curator say to I , " that be ridiculous , you know , this be new york , this chair will be empty , nobody have time to sit in front of you . "     ( laughter )     but I sit for three month . and I sit everyday , eight hour — the opening of the museum — and 10 hour on friday when the museum be open 10 hour , and I never move . and I remove the table and I be still sit , and this change everything . this performance , maybe 10 or 15 year ago — nothing would have happen . but the need of people to actually experience something different , the public be not anymore the group — relation be one to one . I be watch these people , they would come and sit in front of I , but they would have to wait for hour and hour and hour to get to this position , and finally , they sit .     and what happen ? they be observe by the other people , they be photograph , they be film by the camera , they be observe by I and they have nowhere to escape except in themselves . and that make a difference . there be so much pain and loneliness , there be so much incredible thing when you look in somebody else 's eye , because in the gaze with that total stranger , that you never even say one word — everything happen . and I understand when I stand up from that chair after three month , I be not the same anymore . and I understand that I have a very strong mission , that I have to communicate this experience to everybody .     and this be how , for I , be bear the idea to have an institute of immaterial performing art . because think about immateriality , performance be time - base art . it be not like a painting . you have the painting on the wall , the next day it be there . performance , if you be miss it , you only have the memory , or the story of somebody else tell you , but you actually miss the whole thing . so you have to be there . and in my point , if you talk about immaterial art , music be the high — absolutely high art of all , because it be the most immaterial . and then after this be performance , and then everything else . that be my subjective way .     this institute be go to happen in hudson , upstate new york , and we be try to build with rem koolhaas , an idea . and it be very simple . if you want to get experience , you have to give I your time . you have to sign the contract before you enter the building , that you will spend there a full six hour , you have to give I your word of honor . it be something so old - fashioned , but if you do not respect your own word of honor and you leave before — that be not my problem . but it be six hour , the experience . and then after you finish , you get a certificate of accomplishment , so get home and frame it if you want .     ( laughter )     this be orientation hall . the public come in , and the first thing you have to do be dress in lab coat . it be this importance of step from be just a viewer into experimenter . and then you go to the locker and you put your watch , your iphone , your ipod , your computer and everything digital , electronic . and you be get free time for yourself for the first time . because there be nothing wrong with technology , our approach to technology be wrong . we be lose the time we have for ourselves . this be an institute to actually give you back this time .     so what you do here , first you start slow walking , you start slow down . you be go back to simplicity . after slow walking , you be go to learn how to drink water — very simple , drink water for maybe half an hour . after this , you be go to the magnet chamber , where you be go to create some magnet stream on your body . then after this , you go to crystal chamber . after crystal chamber , you go to eye - gaze chamber , after eye - gaze chamber , you go to a chamber where you be lie down . so it be the three basic position of the human body , sitting , stand and lying . and slow walking . and there be a sound chamber . and then after you 've see all of this , and prepare yourself mentally and physically , then you be ready to see something with a long duration , like in immaterial art . it can be music , it can be opera , it can be a theater piece , it can be film , it can be video dance . you go to the long duration chair because now you be comfortable . in the long duration chair , you be transport to the big place where you be go to see the work . and if you fall asleep , which be very possible because it be be a long day , you be go to be transport to the parking lot .     ( laughter )     and you know , sleep be very important . in sleep , you be still receive art . so in the parking lot you stay for a certain amount of time , and then after this you just , you know , go back , you see more of the thing you like to see or go home with your certificate .     so this institute right now be virtual . right now , I be just make my institute in brazil , then it be go to be in australia , then it be come here , to canada and everywhere . and this be to experience a kind of simple method , how you go back to simplicity in your own life . count rice will be another thing .     ( laughter )     you know , if you count rice you can make life , too . how to count rice for six hour ? it be incredibly important . you know , you go through this whole range of be bored , be angry , be completely frustrate , not finish the amount of rice you be count . and then this unbelievable amount of peace you get when satisfy work be finish — or count sand in the desert . or have the sound - isolate situation — that you have headphone , that you do not hear anything , and you be just there together without sound , with the people experience silence , just the simple silence .     we be always do thing we like in our life . and this be why you be not change . you do thing in life — it be just nothing happen if you always do thing the same way . but my method be to do thing I be afraid of , the thing I fear , the thing I do not know , to go to territory that nobody be ever be .     and then also to include the failure . I think failure be important because if you go , if you experiment , you can fail . if you do not go into that area and you do not fail , you be actually repeat yourself over and over again . and I think that human being right now need a change , and the only change to be make be a personal level change . you have to make the change on yourself . because the only way to change consciousness and to change the world around we , be to start with yourself . it be so easy to criticize how it be different , the thing in the world and they be not right , and the government be corrupt and there be hunger in the world and there be war — the killing . but what we do on the personal level — what be our contribution to this whole thing ?     can you turn to your neighbor , the one you do not know , and look at they for two full minute in their eye , right now ?     ( chatter )     I be ask two minute of your time , that be so little . breathe slowly , do not try to blink , do not be self - conscious . be relax . and just look a complete stranger in your eye , in his eye .     ( silence ) thank you for trust I .     ( applause )     chris anderson : thank you . thank you so much .  
   we be at a tipping point in human history , a specie poise between gain the star and lose the planet we call home .     even in just the past few year , we 've greatly expand our knowledge of how earth fit within the context of our universe . nasa 's kepler mission have discover thousand of potential planet around other star , indicate that earth be but one of billion of planet in our galaxy . kepler be a space telescope that measure the subtle dimming of star as planet pass in front of they , block just a little bit of that light from reach we . kepler 's datum reveal planet ' size as well as their distance from their parent star . together , this help we understand whether these planet be small and rocky , like the terrestrial planet in our own solar system , and also how much light they receive from their parent sun . in turn , this provide clue as to whether these planet that we discover might be habitable or not .     unfortunately , at the same time as we be discover this treasure trove of potentially habitable world , our own planet be sag under the weight of humanity . 2014 be the hot year on record . glacier and sea ice that have be with we for millennium be now disappear in a matter of decade . these planetary - scale environmental   change that we have set in motion be rapidly outpace our ability to alter their course .     but I be not a climate scientist , I be an astronomer . I study planetary habitability as influence by star with the hope of find the place in the universe where we might discover life beyond our own planet . you could say that I look for choice alien real estate .     now , as somebody who be deeply embed in the search for life in the universe , I can tell you that the more you look for planet like earth , the more you appreciate our own planet itself . each one of these new world invite a comparison between the newly discover planet and the planet we know well : those of our own solar system .     consider our neighbor , mars . mars be small and rocky , and though it be a bit far from the sun , it might be consider a potentially habitable world if find by a mission like kepler . indeed , it be possible that mar be habitable in the past , and in part , this be why we study mar so much . our rover , like curiosity , crawl across its surface , scratch for clue as to the origin of life as we know it . orbiter like the maven mission sample the martian atmosphere , try to understand how mar might have lose its past habitability . private spaceflight company now offer not just a short trip to near space but the tantalizing possibility of live our life on mar .     but though these martian vista resemble the desert of our own home world , place that be tie in our imagination to idea about pioneer and frontier , compare to earth mar be a pretty terrible place to live . consider the extent to which we have not colonize the desert of our own planet , place that be lush by comparison with mar . even in the driest , high place on earth , the air be sweet and thick with oxygen exhale from thousand of mile away by our rainforest .     I worry — I worry that this excitement about colonize mar and other planet carry with it a long , dark shadow : the implication and belief by some that mar will be there to save we from the self - inflict destruction of the only truly habitable planet we know of , the earth . as much as I love interplanetary exploration , I deeply disagree with this idea . there be many excellent reason to go to mar , but for anyone to tell you that mar will be there to back up humanity be like the captain of the titanic tell you that the real party be happen later on the lifeboat . ( laughter ) ( applause )     thank you .     but the goal of interplanetary exploration and planetary preservation be not opposed to one another . no , they be in fact two side of the same goal : to understand , preserve and improve life into the future . the extreme environment of our own world be alien vista . they be just close to home . if we can understand how to create and maintain habitable space out of hostile , inhospitable space here on earth , perhaps we can meet the need of both preserve our own environment and move beyond it .     I leave you with a final thought experiment : fermi 's paradox . many year ago , the physicist enrico fermi ask that , give the fact that our universe have be around for a very long time and we expect that there be many planet within it , we should have find evidence for alien life by now . so where be they ? well , one possible solution to fermi 's paradox be that , as civilization become technologically advanced enough to consider live amongst the star , they lose sight of how important it be to safeguard the home world that foster that advancement to begin with . it be hubris to believe that interplanetary colonization alone will save we from ourselves , but planetary preservation and interplanetary exploration can work together .     if we truly believe in our ability to bend the hostile environment of mar for human habitation , then we should be able to surmount the far easy task of preserve the habitability of the earth .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be in search of another planet in the universe where life exist . I can not see this planet with my naked eye or even with the most powerful telescope we currently possess . but I know that it be there . and understand contradiction that occur in nature will help we find it .     on our planet , where there be water , there be life . so we look for planet that orbit at just the right distance from their star . at this distance , show in blue on this diagram for star of different temperature , planet could be warm enough for water to flow on their surface as lake and ocean where life might reside . some astronomer focus their time and energy on find planet at these distance from their star . what I do pick up where their job end . I model the possible climate of exoplanet . and here be why that be important : there be many factor besides distance from its star that control whether a planet can support life .     take the planet venus . it be name after the roman goddess of love and beauty , because of its benign , ethereal appearance in the sky . but spacecraft measurement reveal a different story . the surface temperature be close to 900 degree fahrenheit , 500 celsius . that be hot enough to melt lead . its thick atmosphere , not its distance from the sun , be the reason . it cause a greenhouse effect on steroid , trap heat from the sun and scorch the planet 's surface . the reality totally contradict initial perception of this planet . from these lesson from our own solar system , we 've learn that a planet 's atmosphere be crucial to its climate and potential to host life .     we do not know what the atmosphere of these planet be like because the planet be so small and dim compare to their star and so far away from we . for example , one of the close planet that could support surface water — it be call gliese 667 cc — such a glamorous name , right , nice phone number for a name — it be 23 light year away . so that be more than 100 trillion mile . try to measure the atmospheric composition of an exoplanet pass in front of its host star be hard . it be like try to see a fruit fly pass in front of a car 's headlight . ok , now imagine that car be 100 trillion mile away , and you want to know the precise color of that fly .     so I use computer model to calculate the kind of atmosphere a planet would need to have a suitable climate for water and life .     here be an artist 's concept of the planet kepler-62f , with the earth for reference . it be 1,200 light year away , and just 40 percent large than earth . our nsf - fund work find that it could be warm enough for open water from many type of atmosphere and orientation of its orbit . so I would like future telescope to follow up on this planet to look for sign of life .     ice on a planet 's surface be also important for climate . ice absorb long , red wavelength of light , and reflect short , bluer light . that be why the iceberg in this photo look so blue . the red light from the sun be absorb on its way through the ice . only the blue light make it all the way to the bottom . then it gets reflect back to up to our eye and we see blue ice . my model show that planet orbit cooler star could actually be warm than planet orbit hotter star . there be another contradiction — that ice absorb the long wavelength light from cooler star , and that light , that energy , heat the ice .     use climate model to explore how these contradiction can affect planetary climate be vital to the search for life elsewhere .     and it be no surprise that this be my specialty . I be an african - american female astronomer and a classically train actor who love to wear makeup and read fashion magazine , so I be uniquely positioned to appreciate contradiction in nature —     ( laughter )     ( applause )     ... and how they can inform our search for the next planet where life exist .     my organization , rise stargirl , teach astronomy to middle - school girl of color , use theater , writing and visual art . that be another contradiction — science and art do not often go together , but interweave they can help these girl bring their whole self to what they learn , and maybe one day join the rank of astronomer who be full of contradiction , and use their background to discover , once and for all , that we be truly not alone in the universe .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   so a while ago , I try an experiment . for one year , I would say yes to all the thing that scare I . anything that make I nervous , take I out of my comfort zone , I force myself to say yes to . do I want to speak in public ? no , but yes . do I want to be on live tv ? no , but yes . do I want to try act ? no , no , no , but yes , yes , yes .     and a crazy thing happen : the very act of do the thing that scare I undo the fear , make it not scary . my fear of public speaking , my social anxiety , poof , go . it be amazing , the power of one word . " yes " change my life . " yes " change I . but there be one particular yes that affect my life in the most profound way , in a way I never imagine , and it start with a question from my toddler .     I have these three amazing daughter , harper , beckett and emerson , and emerson be a toddler who inexplicably refer to everyone as " honey . " as though she be a southern waitress .     ( laughter )     " honey , I be going to need some milk for my sippy cup . "     ( laughter )     the southern waitress ask I to play with she one evening when I be on my way somewhere , and I say , " yes . " and that yes be the beginning of a new way of life for my family . I make a vow that from now on , every time one of my child ask I to play , no matter what I be do or where I be go , I say yes , every single time . almost . I be not perfect at it , but I try hard to practice it . and it be have a magical effect on I , on my child , on our family . but it be also have a stunning side effect , and it be not until recently that I fully understand it , that I understand that say yes to play with my child likely save my career .     see , I have what most people would call a dream job . I be a writer . I imagine . I make stuff up for a living . dream job . no . I be a titan . dream job . I create television . I executive produce television . I make television , a great deal of television . in one way or another , this tv season , I be responsible for bring about 70 hour of programming to the world . four television program , 70 hour of tv —     ( applause )     three show in production at a time , sometimes four . each show create hundred of job that do not exist before . the budget for one episode of network television can be anywhere from three to six million dollar . let us just say five . a new episode make every nine day time four show , so every nine day that be 20 million dollar worth of television , four television program , 70 hour of tv , three show in production at a time , sometimes four , 16 episode go on at all time : 24 episode of " grey 's , " 21 episode of " scandal , " 15 episode of " how to get away with murder , " 10 episode of " the catch , " that be 70 hour of tv , that be 350 million dollar for a season . in america , my television show be back to back to back on thursday night . around the world , my show air in 256 territory in 67 language for an audience of 30 million people . my brain be global , and 45 hour of that 70 hour of tv be show I personally create and not just produce , so on top of everything else , I need to find time , real quiet , creative time , to gather my fan around the campfire and tell my story . four television program , 70 hour of tv , three show in production at a time , sometimes four , 350 million dollar , campfire burn all over the world . you know who else be do that ? nobody , so like I say , I be a titan . dream job .     ( applause )     now , I do not tell you this to impress you . I tell you this because I know what you think of when you hear the word " writer . " I tell you this so that all of you out there who work so hard , whether you run a company or a country or a classroom or a store or a home , take I seriously when I talk about work , so you 'll get that I do not peck at a computer and imagine all day , so you 'll hear I when I say that I understand that a dream job be not about dream . it be all job , all work , all reality , all blood , all sweat , no tear . I work a lot , very hard , and I love it .     when I be hard at work , when I be deep in it , there be no other feeling . for I , my work be at all time build a nation out of thin air . it be man the troop . it be paint a canvas . it be hit every high note . it be run a marathon . it be be beyoncé . and it be all of those thing at the same time . I love work . it be creative and mechanical and exhausting and exhilarating and hilarious and disturbing and clinical and maternal and cruel and judicious , and what make it all so good be the hum . there be some kind of shift inside I when the work get good . a hum begin in my brain , and it grow and it grow and that hum sound like the open road , and I could drive it forever . and a lot of people , when I try to explain the hum , they assume that I be talk about the writing , that my writing bring I joy . and do not get I wrong , it do . but the hum — it be not until I start make television that I start work , work and make and build and create and collaborating , that I discover this thing , this buzz , this rush , this hum . the hum be more than write . the hum be action and activity . the hum be a drug . the hum be music . the hum be light and air . the hum be god 's whisper right in my ear . and when you have a hum like that , you can not help but strive for greatness . that feeling , you can not help but strive for greatness at any cost . that be call the hum . or , maybe it be call be a workaholic .     ( laughter )     maybe it be call genius . maybe it be call ego . maybe it be just fear of failure . I do not know . I just know that I be not build for failure , and I just know that I love the hum . I just know that I want to tell you I be a titan , and I know that I do not want to question it .     but here be the thing : the more successful I become , the more show , the more episode , the more barrier break , the more work there be to do , the more ball in the air , the more eye on I , the more history stare , the more expectation there be . the more I work to be successful , the more I need to work . and what do I say about work ? I love work , right ? the nation I be build , the marathon I be run , the troop , the canvas , the high note , the hum , the hum , the hum . I like that hum . I love that hum . I need that hum . I be that hum . be I nothing but that hum ?     and then the hum stop . overwork , overused , overdone , burn out . the hum stop .     now , my three daughter be use to the truth that their mother be a single work titan . harper tell people , " my mom will not be there , but you can text my nanny . " and emerson say , " honey , I be want to go to shondaland . " they be child of a titan . they be baby titan . they be 12 , 3 , and 1 when the hum stop . the hum of the engine die . I stop love work . I could not restart the engine . the hum would not come back . my hum be break . I be do the same thing I always do , all the same titan work , 15 - hour day , work straight through the weekend , no regret , never surrender , a titan never sleep , a titan never quit , full heart , clear eye , yada , whatever . but there be no hum . inside I be silence . four television program , 70 hour of tv , three show in production at a time , sometimes four . four television program , 70 hour of tv , three show in production at a time ... I be the perfect titan . I be a titan you could take home to your mother . all the color be the same , and I be no long have any fun . and it be my life . it be all I do . I be the hum , and the hum be I . so what do you do when the thing you do , the work you love , start to taste like dust ?     now , I know somebody be out there think , " cry I a river , stupid writer titan lady . "     ( laughter )     but you know , you do , if you make , if you work , if you love what you do , be a teacher , be a banker , be a mother , be a painter , be bill gate , if you simply love another person and that give you the hum , if you know the hum , if you know what the hum feel like , if you have be to the hum , when the hum stop , who be you ? what be you ? what be I ? be I still a titan ? if the song of my heart cease to play , can I survive in the silence ?     and then my southern waitress toddler ask I a question . I be on my way out the door , I be late , and she say , " momma , wanna play ? "     and I be just about to say no , when I realize two thing . one , I be suppose to say yes to everything , and two , my southern waitress do not call I " honey . " she be not call everyone " honey " anymore . when do that happen ? I be miss it , be a titan and mourn my hum , and here she be change right before my eye . and so she say , " momma , wanna play ? " and I say , " yes . " there be nothing special about it . we play , and we be join by her sister , and there be a lot of laugh , and I give a dramatic reading from the book everybody poop . nothing out of the ordinary .     ( laughter )     and yet , it be extraordinary , because in my pain and my panic , in the homelessness of my humlessness , I have nothing to do but pay attention . I focus . I be still . the nation I be build , the marathon I be run , the troop , the canvas , the high note do not exist . all that exist be sticky finger and gooey kiss and tiny voice and crayon and that song about letting go of whatever it be that frozen girl need to let go of .     ( laughter )     it be all peace and simplicity . the air be so rare in this place for I that I can barely breathe . I can barely believe I be breathe . play be the opposite of work . and I be happy . something in I loosen . a door in my brain swing open , and a rush of energy come . and it be not instantaneous , but it happen , it do happen . I feel it . a hum creep back . not at full volume , barely there , it be quiet , and I have to stay very still to hear it , but it be there . not the hum , but a hum .     and now I feel like I know a very magical secret . well , let us not get carry away . it be just love . that be all it be . no magic . no secret . it be just love . it be just something we forget . the hum , the work hum , the hum of the titan , that be just a replacement . if I have to ask you who I be , if I have to tell you who I be , if I describe myself in term of show and hour of television and how globally badass my brain be , I have forget what the real hum be . the hum be not power and the hum be not work - specific . the hum be joy - specific . the real hum be love - specific . the hum be the electricity that come from be excite by life . the real hum be confidence and peace . the real hum ignore the stare of history , and the ball in the air , and the expectation , and the pressure . the real hum be singular and original . the real hum be god 's whisper in my ear , but maybe god be whisper the wrong word , because which one of the god be tell I I be the titan ?     it be just love . we could all use a little more love , a lot more love . any time my child ask I to play , I will say yes . I make it a firm rule for one reason , to give myself permission , to free I from all of my workaholic guilt . it be a law , so I do not have a choice , and I do not have a choice , not if I want to feel the hum .     I wish it be that easy , but I be not good at play . I do not like it . I be not interested in do it the way I be interested in do work . the truth be incredibly humble and humiliating to face . I do not like play . I work all the time because I like work . I like work more than I like be at home . face that fact be incredibly difficult to handle , because what kind of person like work more than be at home ?     well , I . I mean , let us be honest , I call myself a titan . I 've get issue .     ( laughter )     and one of those issue be not that I be too relaxed .     ( laughter )     we run around the yard , up and back and up and back . we have 30 - second dance party . we sing show tune . we play with ball . I blow bubble and they pop they . and I feel stiff and delirious and confused most of the time . I itch for my cell phone always . but it be ok . my tiny human show I how to live and the hum of the universe fill I up . I play and I play until I begin to wonder why we ever stop play in the first place .     you can do it too , say yes every time your child ask you to play . be you think that maybe I be an idiot in diamond shoe ? you be right , but you can still do this . you have time . you know why ? because you be not rihanna and you be not a muppet . your child do not think you be that interesting .     ( laughter )     you only need 15 minute . my two- and four - year - old only ever want to play with I for about 15 minute or so before they think to themselves they want to do something else . it be an amazing 15 minute , but it be 15 minute . if I be not a ladybug or a piece of candy , I be invisible after 15 minute .     ( laughter )     and my 13 - year - old , if I can get a 13 - year - old to talk to I for 15 minute I be parent of the year .     ( laughter )     15 minute be all you need . I can totally pull off 15 minute of uninterrupted time on my bad day . uninterrupted be the key . no cell phone , no laundry , no anything . you have a busy life . you have to get dinner on the table . you have to force they to bathe . but you can do 15 minute . my kid be my happy place , they be my world , but it do not have to be your kid , the fuel that feed your hum , the place where life feel more good than not good . it be not about play with your kid , it be about joy . it be about play in general . give yourself the 15 minute . find what make you feel good . just figure it out and play in that arena .     I be not perfect at it . in fact , I fail as often as I succeed , see friend , read book , stare into space . " wanna play ? " start to become shorthand for indulge myself in way I have give up on right around the time I get my first tv show , right around the time I become a titan - in - training , right around the time I start compete with myself for way unknown . 15 minute ? what could be wrong with give myself my full attention for 15 minute ? turn out , nothing . the very act of not work have make it possible for the hum to return , as if the hum 's engine could only refuel while I be away . work do not work without play .     it take a little time , but after a few month , one day the floodgate open and there be a rush , and I find myself stand in my office fill with an unfamiliar melody , full on groove inside I , and around I , and it send I spin with idea , and the humming road be open , and I can drive it and drive it , and I love work again . but now , I like that hum , but I do not love that hum . I do not need that hum . I be not that hum . that hum be not I , not anymore . I be bubble and sticky finger and dinner with friend . I be that hum . life 's hum . love 's hum . work 's hum be still a piece of I , it be just no long all of I , and I be so grateful . and I do not give a crap about be a titan , because I have never once see a titan play red rover , red rover .     I say yes to less work and more play , and somehow I still run my world . my brain be still global . my campfire still burn . the more I play , the happy I be , and the happy my kid be . the more I play , the more I feel like a good mother . the more I play , the free my mind become . the more I play , the well I work . the more I play , the more I feel the hum , the nation I be build , the marathon I be run , the troop , the canvas , the high note , the hum , the hum , the other hum , the real hum , life 's hum . the more I feel that hum , the more this strange , quiver , uncocooned , awkward , brand new , alive non - titan feel like I . the more I feel that hum , the more I know who I be . I be a writer , I make stuff up , I imagine . that part of the job , that be live the dream . that be the dream of the job . because a dream job should be a little bit dreamy .     I say yes to less work and more play . titan need not apply .     wanna play ?     thank you .     ( applause )  
   what do you think when you look at I ? a woman of faith ? an expert ? maybe even a sister . or oppress , brainwash , a terrorist . or just an airport security line delay . that one be actually true .     ( laughter )     if some of your perception be negative , I do not really blame you . that be just how the medium have be portray people who look like I . one study find that 80 percent of news coverage about islam and muslims be negative . and study show that americans say that most do not know a muslim . I guess people do not talk to their uber driver .     ( laughter )     well , for those of you who have never meet a muslim , it be great to meet you . let I tell you who I be . I be a mom , a coffee lover — double espresso , cream on the side . I be an introvert . I be a wannabe fitness fanatic . and I be a practice , spiritual muslim . but not like lady gaga say , because baby , I be not bear this way . it be a choice .     when I be 17 , I decide to come out . no , not as a gay person like some of my friend , but as a muslim , and decide to start wear the hijab , my head cover . my feminist friend be aghast : " why be you oppress yourself ? " the funny thing be , it be actually at that time a feminist declaration of independence from the pressure I feel as a 17 - year - old , to conform to a perfect and unattainable standard of beauty . I do not just passively accept the faith of my parent . I wrestle with the quran . I read and reflect and question and doubt and , ultimately , believe . my relationship with god — it be not love at first sight . it be a trust and a slow surrender that deepen with every reading of the quran . its rhythmic beauty sometimes move I to tear . I see myself in it . I feel that god know I . have you ever feel like someone see you , completely understand you and yet love you anyway ? that be how it feel .     and so later , I get marry , and like all good egyptian , start my career as an engineer .     ( laughter )     I later have a child , after get marry , and I be live essentially the egyptian - american dream .     and then that terrible morning of september , 2001 . I think a lot of you probably remember exactly where you be that morning . I be sit in my kitchen finish breakfast , and I look up on the screen and see the word " break news . " there be smoke , airplane fly into building , people jump out of building . what be this ? an accident ? a malfunction ? my shock quickly turn to outrage . who would do this ? and I switch the channel and I hear ,     " ... muslim terrorist ... , " " ... in the name of islam ... , " " ... middle - eastern descent ... , " " ... jihad ... , " " ... we should bomb mecca . " oh my god .     not only have my country be attack , but in a flash , somebody else 's action have turn I from a citizen to a suspect .     that same day , we have to drive across middle america to move to a new city to start grad school . and I remember sit in the passenger seat as we drive in silence , crouch as low as I could go in my seat , for the first time in my life , afraid for anyone to know I be a muslim .     we move into our apartment that night in a new town in what feel like a completely different world . and then I be hear and see and read warning from national muslim organization say thing like , " be alert , " " be aware , " " stay in well - light area , " " do not congregate . "     I stay inside all week . and then it be friday that same week , the day that muslims congregate for worship . and again the warning be , " do not go that first friday , it could be a target . " and I be watch the news , wall - to - wall coverage . emotion be so raw , understandably , and I be also hear about attack on muslim , or people who be perceive to be muslim , be pull out and beat in the street . mosque be actually firebomb . and I think , we should just stay home .     and yet , something do not feel right . because those people who attack our country attack our country . I get it that people be angry at the terrorist . guess what ? so be i. and so to have to explain you all the time be not easy . I do not mind question . I love question . it be the accusation that be tough .     today we hear people actually say thing like , " there be a problem in this country , and it be call muslims . when be we go to get rid of they ? " so , some people want to ban muslims and close down mosque . they talk about my community kind of like we be a tumor in the body of america . and the only question be , be we malignant or benign ? you know , a malignant tumor you extract altogether , and a benign tumor you just keep under surveillance .     the choice do not make sense , because it be the wrong question . muslim , like all other american , be not a tumor in the body of america , we be a vital organ .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     muslims be inventor and teacher , first responder and olympic athlete .     now , be close down mosque go to make america safe ? it might free up some parking spot , but it will not end terrorism . go to a mosque regularly be actually link to have more tolerant view of people of other faith and great civic engagement . and as one police chief in the washington , dc area recently tell I , people do not actually get radicalize at mosque . they get radicalize in their basement or bedroom , in front of a computer . and what you find about the radicalization process be it start online , but the first thing that happen be the person gets cut off from their community , from even their family , so that the extremist group can brainwash they into believe that they , the terrorist , be the true muslim , and everyone else who abhor their behavior and ideology be sellout or apostate . so if we want to prevent radicalization , we have to keep people go to the mosque .     now , some will still argue islam be a violent religion . after all , a group like isis base its brutality on the quran . now , as a muslim , as a mother , as a human being , I think we need to do everything we can to stop a group like isis . but we would be give in to their narrative if we cast they as representative of a faith of 1.6 billion people .     ( applause )     thank you .     isis have as much to do with islam as the ku klux klan have to do with christianity .     ( applause )     both group claim to base their ideology on their holy book . but when you look at they , they be not motivate by what they read in their holy book . it be their brutality that make they read these thing into the scripture .     recently , a prominent imam tell I a story that really take I aback . he say that a girl come to he because she be think of go to join isis . and I be really surprised and ask he , have she be in contact with a radical religious leader ? and he say the problem be quite the opposite , that every cleric that she have talk to have shut she down and say that her rage , her sense of injustice in the world , be just go to get she in trouble . and so with nowhere to channel and make sense of this anger , she be a prime target to be exploit by extremist promise she a solution . what this imam do be to connect she back to god and to her community . he do not shame she for her rage — instead , he give she constructive way to make real change in the world . what she learn at that mosque prevent she from go to join isis .     I 've tell you a little bit about how islamophobia affect I and my family . but how do it impact ordinary american ? how do it impact everyone else ? how do consume fear 24 hour a day affect the health of our democracy , the health of our free thought ?     well , one study — actually , several study in neuroscience — show that when we be afraid , at least three thing happen . we become more accepting of authoritarianism , conformity and prejudice . one study show that when subject be expose to news story that be negative about muslim , they become more accepting of military attack on muslim country and policy that curtail the right of american muslims .     now , this be not just academic . when you look at when anti - muslim sentiment spike between 2001 and 2013 , it happen three time , but it be not around terrorist attack . it be in the run up to the iraq war and during two election cycle . so islamophobia be not just the natural response to muslim terrorism as I would have expect . it can actually be a tool of public manipulation , erode the very foundation of a free society , which be rational and well - inform citizen . muslims be like canary in the coal mine . we might be the first to feel it , but the toxic air of fear be harm we all .     ( applause )     and assign collective guilt be not just about have to explain you all the time . deah and his wife yusor be a young married couple live in chapel hill , north carolina , where they both go to school . deah be an athlete . he be in dental school , talente , promise ... and his sister would tell I that he be the sweet , most generous human being she know . she be visit he there and he show she his resume , and she be amazed . she say , " when do my baby brother become such an accomplished young man ? " just a few week after suzanne 's visit to her brother and his new wife , their neighbor , craig stephen hicks , murder they , as well as yusor 's sister , razan , who be visit for the afternoon , in their apartment , execution style , after post anti - muslim statement on his facebook page . he shoot deah eight time . so bigotry be not just immoral , it can even be lethal .     so , back to my story . what happen after 9/11 ? do we go to the mosque or do we play it safe and stay home ? well , we talk it over , and it might seem like a small decision , but to we , it be about what kind of america we want to leave for our kid : one that would control we by fear or one where we be practice our religion freely . so we decide to go to the mosque . and we put my son in his car seat , buckle he in , and we drive silently , intensely , to the mosque . I take he out , I take off my shoe , I walk into the prayer hall and what I see make I stop . the place be completely full . and then the imam make an announcement , thank and welcome our guest , because half the congregation be christian , jews , buddhist , atheist , people of faith and no faith , who have come not to attack we , but to stand in solidarity with we .     ( applause )     I just break down at this time . these people be there because they choose courage and compassion over panic and prejudice .     what will you choose ? what will you choose at this time of fear and bigotry ? will you play it safe ? or will you join those who say we be well than that ?     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you so much .     helen walter : so dalia , you seem to have strike a chord . but I wonder , what would you say to those who might argue that you be give a ted talk , you be clearly a deep thinker , you work at a fancy think tank , you be an exception , you be not the rule . what would you say to those people ?     dalia mogahe : I would say , do not let this stage distract you , I be completely ordinary . I be not an exception . my story be not unusual . I be as ordinary as they come . when you look at muslims around the world — and I 've do this , I 've do the large study ever do on muslims around the world — people want ordinary thing . they want prosperity for their family , they want job and they want to live in peace . so I be not in any way an exception . when you meet people who seem like an exception to the rule , oftentime it be that the rule be break , not that they be an exception to it .     hw : thank you so much . dalia mogahe .     ( applause )  
   so a few year ago , I do something really brave , or some would say really stupid . I run for congress .     for year , I have exist safely behind the scene in politic as a fundraiser , as an organizer , but in my heart , I always want to run . the sit congresswoman have be in my district since 1992 . she have never lose a race , and no one have really even run against she in a democratic primary . but in my mind , this be my way to make a difference , to disrupt the status quo . the poll , however , tell a very different story . my pollster tell I that I be crazy to run , that there be no way that I could win .     but I run anyway , and in 2012 , I become an upstart in a new york city congressional race . I swear I be go to win . I have the endorsement from the new york daily news , the wall street journal snap picture of I on election day , and cnbc call it one of the hot race in the country . I raise money from everyone I know , include indian auntie that be just so happy an indian girl be run . but on election day , the poll be right , and I only get 19 percent of the vote , and the same paper that say I be a rise political star now say I waste 1.3 million dollar on 6,321 vote . do not do the math . it be humiliating .     now , before you get the wrong idea , this be not a talk about the importance of failure . nor be it about lean in . I tell you the story of how I run for congress because I be 33 year old and it be the first time in my entire life that I have do something that be truly brave , where I do not worry about be perfect .     and I be not alone : so many woman I talk to tell I that they gravitate towards career and profession that they know they be go to be great in , that they know they be go to be perfect in , and it be no wonder why . most girl be teach to avoid risk and failure . we be teach to smile pretty , play it safe , get all a 's . boy , on the other hand , be teach to play rough , swing high , crawl to the top of the monkey bar and then just jump off headfirst . and by the time they be adult , whether they be negotiate a raise or even ask someone out on a date , they be habituate to take risk after risk . they be reward for it . it be often say in silicon valley , no one even take you seriously unless you 've have two fail start - up . in other word , we be raise our girl to be perfect , and we be raise our boy to be brave .     some people worry about our federal deficit , but I , I worry about our bravery deficit . our economy , our society , we be just lose out because we be not raise our girl to be brave . the bravery deficit be why woman be underrepresented in stem , in c - suite , in boardroom , in congress , and pretty much everywhere you look .     in the 1980s , psychologist carol dweck look at how bright fifth grader handle an assignment that be too difficult for they . she find that bright girl be quick to give up . the high the iq , the more likely they be to give up . bright boy , on the other hand , find the difficult material to be a challenge . they find it energize . they be more likely to redouble their effort .     what be go on ? well , at the fifth grade level , girl routinely outperform boy in every subject , include math and science , so it be not a question of ability . the difference be in how boy and girl approach a challenge . and it do not just end in fifth grade . an hp report find that man will apply for a job if they meet only 60 percent of the qualification , but woman , woman will apply only if they meet 100 percent of the qualification . 100 percent . this study be usually invoke as evidence that , well , woman need a little more confidence . but I think it be evidence that woman have be socialize to aspire to perfection , and they be overly cautious .     ( applause )     and even when we be ambitious , even when we be lean in , that socialization of perfection have cause we to take less risk in our career . and so those 600,000 job that be open right now in computing and tech , woman be be leave behind , and it mean our economy be be leave behind on all the innovation and problem woman would solve if they be socialize to be brave instead of socialize to be perfect .     ( applause )     so in 2012 , I start a company to teach girl to code , and what I find be that by teach they to code I have socialize they to be brave . code , it be an endless process of trial and error , of try to get the right command in the right place , with sometimes just a semicolon make the difference between success and failure . code break and then it fall apart , and it often take many , many try until that magical moment when what you be try to build come to life . it require perseverance . it require imperfection .     we immediately see in our program our girl ' fear of not get it right , of not be perfect . every girl who code teacher tell I the same story . during the first week , when the girl be learn how to code , a student will call she over and she 'll say , " I do not know what code to write . " the teacher will look at her screen , and she 'll see a blank text editor . if she do not know any well , she would think that her student spend the past 20 minute just stare at the screen . but if she press undo a few time , she 'll see that her student write code and then delete it . she try , she come close , but she do not get it exactly right . instead of show the progress that she make , she would rather show nothing at all . perfection or bust .     it turn out that our girl be really good at code , but it be not enough just to teach they to code .     my friend lev brie , who be a professor at the university of columbia and teach intro to java tell I about his office hour with computer science student . when the guy be struggle with an assignment , they 'll come in and they 'll say , " professor , there be something wrong with my code . " the girl will come in and say , " professor , there be something wrong with I . "     we have to begin to undo the socialization of perfection , but we 've get to combine it with build a sisterhood that let girl know that they be not alone . because try hard be not go to fix a broken system . I can not tell you how many woman tell I ,     " I be afraid to raise my hand , I be afraid to ask a question , because I do not want to be the only one who do not understand , the only one who be struggle . when we teach girl to be brave and we have a supportive network cheer they on , they will build incredible thing , and I see this every day . take , for instance , two of our high school student who build a game call tampon run — yes , tampon run — to fight against the menstruation taboo and sexism in gaming . or the syrian refugee who dare show her love for her new country by build an app to help americans get to the poll . or a 16 - year - old girl who build an algorithm to help detect whether a cancer be benign or malignant in the off chance that she can save her daddy 's life because he have cancer . these be just three example of thousand , thousand of girl who have be socialize to be imperfect , who have learn to keep try , who have learn perseverance . and whether they become coder or the next hillary clinton or beyoncé , they will not defer their dream .     and those dream have never be more important for our country . for the american economy , for any economy to grow , to truly innovate , we can not leave behind half our population . we have to socialize our girl to be comfortable with imperfection , and we 've get to do it now . we can not wait for they to learn how to be brave like I do when I be 33 year old . we have to teach they to be brave in school and early in their career , when it have the most potential to impact their life and the life of other , and we have to show they that they will be love and accept not for be perfect but for be courageous . and so I need each of you to tell every young woman you know — your sister , your niece , your employee , your colleague — to be comfortable with imperfection , because when we teach girl to be imperfect , and we help they leverage it , we will build a movement of young woman who be brave and who will build a well world for themselves and for each and every one of we .     thank you .     ( applause ) thank you .     chris anderson : reshma , thank you . it be such a powerful vision you have . you have a vision . tell I how it be go . how many girl be involve now in your program ?     reshma saujani : yeah . so in 2012 , we teach 20 girl . this year we 'll teach 40,000 in all 50 state .     ( applause )     and that number be really powerful , because last year we only graduate 7,500 woman in computer science . like , the problem be so bad that we can make that type of change quickly .     can : and you be work with some of the company in this room even , who be welcome graduate from your program ?     rs : yeah , we have about 80 partner , from twitter to facebook to adobe to ibm to microsoft to pixar to disney , I mean , every single company out there . and if you be not sign up , I be go to find you , because we need every single tech company to embed a girl who code classroom in their office .     can : and you have some story back from some of those company that when you mix in more gender balance in the engineering team , good thing happen .     rs : great thing happen . I mean , I think that it be crazy to I to think about the fact that right now 85 percent of all consumer purchase be make by woman . woman use social medium at a rate of 600 percent more than man . we own the internet , and we should be build the company of tomorrow . and I think when company have diverse team , and they have incredible woman that be part of their engineering team , they build awesome thing , and we see it every day .     can : reshma , you see the reaction there . you be do incredibly important work . this whole community be cheer you on . more power to you . thank you .     rs : thank you .     ( applause )  
   hannah be excited to be go to college . she could not wait to get out of her parent ' house , to prove to they that she be an adult , and to prove to her new friend that she belong .     she head to a campus party where she see a guy that she have a crush on . let us call he mike . the next day , hannah wake up with a pound headache . she can only remember the night in flash . but what she do remember be throw up in the hall outside mike 's room and stare at the wall silently while he be inside she , want it to stop , then shakily stumble home . she do not feel good about what happen , but she think , " maybe this be just what sex in college be ? "     one in five woman and one in 13 man will be sexually assault at some point during their college career in the united states . less than 10 percent will ever report their assault to their school or to the police . and those who do , on average , wait 11 month to make the report .     hannah initially just feel like deal with what happen on her own . but when she see mike take girl home from party , she be worried about they .     after graduation , hannah learn that she be one of five woman who mike do the exact same thing to . and this be not an unlikely scenario because 90 percent of sexual assault be commit by repeat offender . but with such low reporting rate , it be fairly unlikely that even repeat perpetrator will be report , much less anything happen if they be .     in fact , only six percent of assault report to the police end with the assailant spend a single day in prison . mean , there be a 99 percent chance that they 'll get away with it . this mean there be practically no deterrent to assault in the united states .     now , I be an infectious disease epidemiologist by training . I be interested in system and network and where we can concentrate our resource to do the most good . so this , to I , be a tragic but a solvable problem .     so when the issue of campus assault start hit the news a few year ago , it feel like a unique opportunity to make a change . and so we do . we start by talk to college survivor . and what they wish they would have in college be pretty simple ; they want a website , one they could use at the time and place that feel safe to they with clearly write information about their reporting option , with the ability to electronically report their assault , rather than have the first step to go in and talk to someone who may or may not believe they . with the option to create a secure , timestampe document of what happen to they , preserve evidence even if they do not want to report yet . and lastly , and perhaps most critically , with the ability to report their assault only if someone else report the same assailant . you see , know that you be not the only one change everything . it change the way you frame your own experience , it change the way you think about your perpetrator , it mean that if you do come forward , you 'll have someone else 's back and they 'll have your .     we create a website that actually do this and we launch it [ ... ] in august , on two college campus .     and we include a unique matching system where if mike 's first victim have come forward , save her record , enter into the matching system and name mike , and mike 's second victim have do the same thing a few month later , they would have match and the verify contact information of both survivor would have be send to the authority at the same time for investigation and follow up .     if a system like this have exist for hannah and her peer , it be more likely that they would have report , that they would have be believe , and that mike would have be kick off campus , go to jail , or at least get the help that he need . and if we be able to stop repeat offender like mike after just their second assault follow a match , survivor like hannah would never even be assault in the first place . we could prevent 59 percent of sexual assault just by stop repeat perpetrator early on . and because we be create a real deterrent to assault , for perhaps the first time , maybe the mike of the world would never even try to assault anyone .     the type of system I be describe , the type of system that survivor want be a type of information escrow , mean an entity that hold on to information for you and only release it to a third party when certain pre - agree upon condition be meet , such as a match . the application that we build be for college campus . but the same type of system could be use in the military or even the workplace .     we do not have to live in a world where 99 percent of rapist get away with it . we can create one where those who do wrong be hold accountable , where survivor get the support and justice they deserve , where the authority get the information they need , and where there be a real deterrent to violate the right of another human being .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   it begin with one question : if africa be a bar , what would your country be drink or do ? I kick it off with a guess about south africa , which be not exactly accord to the rule because south africa 's not my country . but allude to the country 's continual attempt to build a postracial society after be ravage for decade by apartheid , I tweet , # ifafricawasabar south africa would be drink all kind of alcohol and beg they to get along in its stomach .     and then I wait . and then I have that funny feeling where I wonder if I cross the line . so , I send out a few other tweet about my own country and a few other african country I be familiar with . and then I wait again , but this time I read through almost every tweet I have ever tweet to convince myself , no , to remind myself that I be really funny and that if nobody get it , that be fine .     but luckily , I do not have to do that for very long . very soon , people be participate . in fact , by the end of that week in july , the hashtag # ifafricawasabar would have garner around 60,000 tweet , light up the continent and make its way to publication all over the world .     people be use the hashtag to do many different thing . to poke fun at their stereotype : [ # ifafricawasabar nigeria would be outside explain that he will pay the entrance fee , all he need be the bouncer 's account detail . ]     ( laughter )     to criticize government spending : [ # ifafricawasabar south africa would be order bottle it can not pronounce run a tab it will not be able to pay ]     to make light of geopolitical tension : [ # ifafricawasabar south sudan would be the new guy with serious anger management issue . ]     to remind we that even in africa there be some country we do not know exist : [ # ifafricawasabar lesotho would be that person who nobody really know but be always in the picture . ]     and also to make fun of the country that do not think that they be in africa : [ # ifafricawasabar egypt , libya , tunisia , algeria and morocco be like " what the hell be we do here ? ! ! " ]     ( laughter )     and to note the country that have make a big turnaround : [ # ifafricawasabar rwanda would be that girl that come with no money and no transport but leave drunk , happy and rich ]     but most importantly , people be use the hashtag to connect . people be connect over their africanness . so for one week in july , twitter become a real african bar . and I be really thrilled , mainly because I realize that pan - africanism could work , that we have before we , between we , at our fingertip a platform that just need a small spark to light in we a hunger for each other .     my name be siyanda mohutsiwa , I be 22 year old and I be pan - africanist by birth . now , I say I be pan - africanist by birth because my parent be from two different african country . my father 's from a country call botswana in southern africa . it be only slightly big than germany . this year we celebrate our 50th year of stable democracy . and it have some very progressive social policy . my mother 's country be the kingdom of swaziland . it be a very , very small country , also in southern africa . it be africa 's last complete monarchy . so it be be rule by a king and a royal family in line with their tradition , for a very long time .     on paper , these country seem very different . and when I be a kid , I could see the difference . it rain a lot in one country , it do not rain quite as much in the other . but outside of that , I do not really realize why it matter that my parent be from two different place . but it would go on to have a very peculiar effect on I . you see , I be bear in one country and raise in the other .     when we move to botswana , I be a toddler who speak fluent siswati and nothing else . so I be be introduce to my new home , my new cultural identity , as a complete outsider , incapable of comprehend anything that be be say to I by the family and country whose tradition I be mean to move forward . but very soon , I would shed siswati . and when I would go back to swaziland , I would be constantly confront by how very non - swazi I be become .     add to that my entry into africa 's private school system , whose entire purpose be to beat the africanness out of you , and I would have a very peculiar adolescence . but I think that my interest in idea of identity be bear here , in the strange intersection of belong to two place at once but not really belong to either one very well and belong to this vast space in between and around simultaneously . I become obsessed with the idea of a share african identity .     since then , I have continue to read about politic and geography and identity and what all those thing mean . I 've also hold on to a deep curiosity about african philosophy . when I begin to read , I gravitate towards the work of black intellectual like steve biko and frantz fanon , who tackle complex idea like decolonization and black consciousness . and when I think , at 14 , that I have digest these grand idea , I move on to the speech of iconic african statesman like burkina faso 's thomas sankara and congo 's patrice lumumba . I read every piece of african fiction that I could get my hand on .     so when twitter come , I hop on with the enthusiasm of a teenage girl whose friend be super , super bored of hear about all this random stuff .     the year be 2011 and all over southern africa and the whole continent , affordable datum package for smartphone and internet surfing become much easy to get . so my generation , we be send message to each other on this platform that just need 140 character and a little bit of creativity . on long commute to work , in lecture that some of we should have be pay attention to , on our lunch break , we would communicate as much as we could about the everyday reality of be young and african .     but of course , this luxury be not available to everybody . so this mean that if you be a teenage girl in botswana and you want to have fun on the internet , one , you have to tweet in english . two , you have to follow more than just the three other people you know online . you have to follow south african , zimbabweans , ghanaian , nigerian . and suddenly , your whole world open up . and my whole world do open up .     I follow vibrant african who be travel around the continent , take picture of themselves and post they under the hashtag # myafrica . because at that time , if you be to search africa on twitter or on google or any kind of social medium , you would think that the entire continent be just picture of animal and white guy drink cocktail in hotel resort .     ( laughter )     but african be use this platform to take some kind of ownership of the tourism sector . it be african take selfie on the beach of nigeria . it be african in cocktail bar in nairobi .     and these be the same african that I begin to meet in my own travel around the continent . we would discuss african literature , politic , economic policy . but almost invariably , every single time , we would end up discuss twitter . and that be when I realize what this be . we be stand in the middle of something amazing , because for the first time ever young african could discuss the future of our continent in real time , without the restriction of border , finance and watchful government .     because the little known truth be many african know a lot less about other african country than some westerner might know about africa as a whole . this be by accident , but sometimes , it be by design . for example , in apartheid south africa , black south africans be constantly be bombard with this message that any country rule by black people be destine for failure . and this be do to convince they that they be much well off under crush white rule than they be live in a black and free nation . add to that africa 's colonial , archaic education system , which have be unthinkingly carry over from the 1920 — and at the age of 15 , I could name all the various cause of the war that have happen in europe in the past 200 year , but I could not name the president of my neighboring country . and to I , this do not make any sense because whether we like it or not , the fate of african people be deeply intertwine .     when disaster hit , when turmoil hit , we share the consequence . when burundians flee political turmoil , they go to we , to other african country . africa have six of the world 's large refugee center . what be once a burundian problem become an african problem . so to I , there be no sudanese problem or south african problem or kenyan problem , only african problem because eventually , we share the turmoil .     so if we share the problem , why be not we do a well job of share the success ? how can we do that ? well , in the long term , we can shoot towards increase inter - african trade , remove border and put pressure on leader to fulfill regional agreement they 've already sign . but I think that the big way for africa to share its success be to foster something I like to call social pan - africanism .     now , political pan - africanism already exist , so I be not invent anything totally new here . but political pan - africanism be usually the african unity of the political elite . and who do that benefit ? well , african leader , almost exclusively . no , what I be talk about be the pan - africanism of the ordinary african . young africans like I , we be burst with creative energy , with innovative idea . but with bad governance and shaky institution , all of this potential could go to waste . on a continent where more than a handful of leader have be in power long than the majority of the population have be alive , we be in desperate need of something new , something that work . and I think that thing be social pan - africanism .     my dream be that young african stop allow border and circumstance to suffocate our innovation . my dream be that when a young african come up with something brilliant , they do not say , " well , this would not work in my country , " and then give up . my dream be that young african begin to realize that the entire continent be our canvas , be our home . use the internet , we can begin to think collaboratively , we can begin to innovate together . in africa , we say , " if you want to go fast , you go alone , but if you want to go far , you go together . " and I believe that social pan - africanism be how we can go far together .     and this be already happen . access to these online network have give young african something we 've always have to violently take : a voice . we now have a platform . before now , if you want to hear from the youth in africa , you wait for the 65 - year - old minister of youth —     ( laughter )     to wake up in the morning , take his heartburn medication and then tell you the plan he have for your generation in 20 year time . before now , if you want to be hear by your possibly tyrannical government , you be push to protest , suffer the consequence and have your finger cross that some western paper somewhere might make someone care . but now we have opportunity to back each other up in way we never could before .     we support south african student who be march against ridiculously high tertiary fee . we support zimbabwean woman who be march to parliament . we support angolan journalist who be be illegally detain . for the first time ever , african pain and african aspiration have the ability to be witness by those who can empathize with it the most : other african .     I believe that with a social pan - africanist thinking and use the internet as a tool , we can begin to rescue each other , and ultimately , to rescue ourselves .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   it have be 128 year since the last country in the world abolish slavery and 53 year since martin luther king pronounce his " I have a dream " speech . but we still live in a world where the color of our skin not only give a first impression , but a last one that remain .     I be bear in a family full of color . my father be the son of a maid from whom he inherit an intense dark chocolate tone . he be adopt by those who I know as my grandparent . the matriarch , my grandma , have a porcelain skin and cotton - like hair . my grandpa be somewhere between a vanilla and strawberry yogurt tone , like my uncle and my cousin . my mother be a cinnamon - skin daughter of a native brazilian , with a pinch of hazel and honey , and a man [ who be ] a mix of coffee with milk , but with a lot of coffee . she have two sister . one in a toast - peanut skin and the other , also adopt , more on the beige side , like a pancake .     ( laughter )     grow up in this family , color be never important for I . outside home , however , thing be different soon . color have many other meaning .     I remember my first drawing lesson in school as a bunch of contradictory feeling . it be exciting and creative but I never understand the unique flesh - color pencil . I be make of flesh but I be not pink . my skin be brown , and people say I be black . I be seven year old with a mess of color in my head .     later , when I take my cousin to school , I be usually take for the nanny . by help in the kitchen at a friend 's party , people think I be the maid . I be even treat like a prostitute just because I be walk alone on the beach with european friend . and many time , visit my grandma or friend in upper class building , I be invite not to use the main elevator . because in the end , with this color and this hair , I can not belong to some place .     in some way , I get to use to it and accept part of it . however , something inside of I keep revolve and struggle .     year later I marry a spaniard . but not any spaniard . I choose one with the skin color of a lobster when sunburnt .     ( laughter )     since then , a new question start to chase I . what will be the color of your child ? as you can understand , this be my last concern . but think about it , with my previous background , my story lead I to make my personal exercise as a photographer . and that be how humanae be bear .     humanae be a pursuit to highlight our true color , rather than the untrue white , red , black or yellow associate with race . it be a kind of game to question our code . it be a work in progress from a personal story to a global history .     I portray the subject in a white background . then I choose an 11 - pixel square from the nose , paint the background , and look for the correspond color in the industrial palette , pantone .     I start with my family and friend , then more and more people join the adventure , thank to public call come through the social medium .     I think that the main space to show my work be the internet because I want an open concept that invite everybody to push the share button in both the computer and their brain .     the snowball start to roll . the project have a great welcome — invitation , exhibition , physical format , gallery and museum ... just happen . and among they , my favorite : when humanae occupy public space and appear in the street , it foster a popular debate and create a feeling of community .     I have portray more than 3,000 people in 13 different country , 19 different city around the world . just to mention some of they — from someone include in the forbe list , to refugee who cross the mediterranean by boat . in paris , from the unesco headquarters to a shelter . and student both in switzerland and favela in rio de janeiro .     all kind of belief , gender identity or physical impairment , a newborn or terminally ill . we all together build humanae .     those portrait make we rethink how we see each other . when modern science be question the race concept , what do it mean for we to be black , white , yellow , red ? be it the eye , the nose , the mouth , the hair ? or do it have to do with our origin , nationality or bank account ?     this personal exercise turn out to be a discovery . suddenly I realize that humanae be useful for many people . it represent a sort of mirror for those who can not find themselves reflect in any label .     it be amazing that people start to share their thought about the work with I . I have hundred of that , I will share with you , too .     a mother of 11 year — a mother of an 11 - year - old girl write I , " very good for I as a tool to work on her confidence , as this past weekend one of her girlfriend argue with she that she do not belong and should not be allow to live in norway . so your work have a very special place in my heart and it be very important for I . "     a woman share her portrait on facebook and write , " all my life , people from across the globe have difficulty to place I in a group , a stereotype , a box . perhaps we should stop . instead of frame , ask the individual , ' how would you label yourself ? ' then I would say , ' hi . I be massiel . I be a dominican - dutch , I grow up in a mixed family and I be a bisexual woman . ' "     besides these unexpected and touching reaction , humanae find a new life in a different variety of field . just to show you some example , illustrator and art student use it as a reference for their sketch and their study . it be a collection of face .     researcher in the field of anthropology , physics and neuroscience use humanae with different scientific approach relate to human ethnicity , optophysiology , face recognition or alzheimer 's .     one of the most important impact of the project be that humanae be choose to be the cover of foreign affair , one of the most relevant political publication . and talk about foreign affair , I find the perfect ambassador for my project ... teacher . they be the one that use humanae as a tool for educational purpose . their passion encourage I to go back to drawing class , but this time as a teacher myself .     my student , both adult and kid , paint their self - portrait , try to discover their own unique color .     as a photographer , I realize that I can be a channel for other to communicate . as an individual , as angélica , every time I take a picture , I feel that I be sit in front of a therapist . all the frustration , fear and loneliness that I once feel ... become love .     the last country — the last country in the world who abolish slavery be the country where I be bear , brazil . we still have to work hard to abolish discrimination . that remain a common practice worldwide , and that will not disappear by itself .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .  
   I be here to talk to you today about a story that we have all be condition to believe be not possible . it be a story about a living , breathe start - up flourish in an unlikely environment : the united states government . now , this start - up be fundamentally begin to disrupt the way government do business from the inside out . but before I get there , let us start with the problem .     for I , the problem begin with a number : 137 . 137 be the average number of day a veteran have to wait to have benefit process by the va . 137 day . now , in order to file that application in the first place , she have to navigate over 1,000 different website and over 900 different call - in number , all own and operate by the united states government .     now , we live in time of incredible change . the private sector be constantly change and improve itself all the time . for that matter , it be remove every single inconvenience in my life that I could possibly think of . I could be sit on my couch in my apartment , and from my phone , I can order a warm , gluten - free meal that can arrive at my door in less than 10 minute . but meanwhile , a work mother who depend on food stamp to support her family have to complete an arduous , complicated application which she might not even be able to do online . and the inability of she to do that same work from her couch mean that she might be have to take day or hour off of work that she can not spare . and this grow dichotomy between the beneficiary of the tech revolution and those it be leave behind be one of the great challenge of our time —     ( applause )     because government 's failure to deliver digital service that work be disproportionately impact the very people who need it most . it be impact the student try to go to college , the single mother try to get health care , the veteran come home from battle . they can not get what they need when they need it . and for these americans , government be more than just a presidential election every four year . government be a lifeline that provide service they need and depend on and deserve . which be , quite frankly , why government need to get its shit together and catch up . just say .     ( applause )     now , this be not always a problem I be passionate about . when I join president obama 's campaign in 2008 , we bring the tech industry 's good practice into politic . we earn more money , we engage more volunteer and we earn more vote than any political campaign in history . we be a cut - edge start - up that change the game of politic forever . so when the president ask a small group of we to bring that very same disruption directly into government , I know it be not go to be easy work , but I be eager and show up ready to get to work .     now , on my first day in dc , my first day in government , I walk into the office and they hand I a laptop . and the laptop be run window 98 .     ( laughter )     I mean , three entire presidential election have come and go since the government have update the operating system on that computer . three election ! which be when we realize this problem be a whole lot big than we ever could have imagine . let I paint the picture for you .     the federal government be the large institution in the world . it spend over 86 billion dollar a year — 86 billion — on federal it project . for context : that be more than the entire venture capital industry spend annually — on everything . now , the problem here be that we the taxpayer be not get what we pay for , because 94 percent of federal it project be over budget or behind schedule . 94 percent ! for those of you keep score , yes , the number 94 be very close to 100 .     ( laughter )     there be another problem : 40 percent of those never end up see the light of day . they be completely scrap or abandon . now , this be a very existentially painful moment for any organization , because it mean as government continue to operate as it be program to do , failure be nearly inevitable . and when the status quo be the riskiest option , that mean there be simply no other choice than radical disruption .     so , what do we do about it ? how do we fix this ? well , the irony of all of this be that we actually do not have to look any far than our backyard , because right here in america be the very idea , the very people , who have sweep our world into a radically different place than it be two decade ago . so what would it look like if it be actually as easy to get student loan or veteran ' benefit as it be to order cat food to my house ? what would it look like if there be an easy pathway for the very entrepreneur and innovator who have disrupt our tech sector to come and disrupt their government ?     well , my friend , here be where we get to talk about some of the exciting new formula we 've discover for create change in government . enter the united states digital service . the united states digital service be a new network of start - up , a team of team , organize themselves across government to create radical change . the mission of the united states digital service be to help government deliver world - class digital service for student , immigrant , child , the elderly — everybody — at dramatically low cost . we be essentially try to build a more awesome government , for the people , by the people , today . we do not care — ( applause ) thank you .     ( applause )     who do not want a more awesome government , right ?     we do not care about politic . we care about make government work well , because it be the only one we 've get .     ( applause )     now , you can think of our team — well , it be pretty funny — you can think of our team a little bit like the peace corps meet darpa meet seal team 6 . we be like the peace corps for nerd , but instead of travel to crazy , interesting , far - off place , you spend a lot of time indoor , behind computer , help restore the fabric of our democracy .     ( laughter )     now , this team — our playbook for the united states digital service be pretty simple . the first play be we recruit the very good talent our country have to offer , and recruit they for short tour of duty inside government . these be the very people who have help build the product and company that have make our tech sector amongst the most innovative in the world . second , we pair these incredible people from the tech core with the dedicated civil servant already inside government on the ground create change . third , we strategically deploy they in a target formation at the most mission - critical , life - change , important service that government offer . and finally , we give they massive air cover , from the leadership inside the agency all the way up to the president himself , to transform these service for the well .     now , this team be begin to disrupt how government do business from the inside out . if you study classic pattern of disruption , one very common pattern be rather simple . it be to take something that have become routine and standard in one industry and apply it to another where it be a radical departure from the status quo . think about what airbnb take that be normal from hospitality and revolutionize my apartment . the united states digital service be do exactly that . we be take what silicon valley and the private sector have learn through a ton of hard work about how to build planetary - scale digital service that delight user at low cost , and we be apply that to government , where it be a radical departure from the status quo .     now , the good news be : it be start to work . we know this because we can already see the result from some of our early project , like the rescue effort of healthcare.gov , when that go off the rail . fix healthcare.gov be the first place that we run this play , and today we be take that same play and scale it across a large number of government 's most important citizen - face service . now , if I can take a moment and brag about the team for a second — it be the high concentration of badasse I could have ever dream of . we have top talent from google , facebook , amazon , twitter and the like , all on staff today , all choose to join their government . and what be incredible be , everybody be as eager and kind as they be intelligent . and I might add , by the way , over half of we be woman .     ( applause )     the good way to understand this strategy be actually to walk through a couple of example of how it be work out in the wild . I be go to give you two example quickly .     the first one be about immigration . this , my friend , be your typical immigration application . yes , you guess it — it be almost entirely paper - base . in the good case , the application take about six to eight month to process . it be physically ship thousand of mile — thousand of mile ! — between no less than six processing center . now , little story : about a decade ago , the government think that if it bring this system online , it could save taxpayer dollar and provide a well service , which be a great idea . so , the typical government process begin . six year and 1.2 billion dollar later , no work product be deliver — 1.2 billion with a " b. " now at this point , the agency responsible , we citizenship and immigration service , could have keep pour money into the fail program . sadly , that be what often happen . that be the status quo today . but they do not . the dedicated civil servant inside the agency decide to stand up and call for change . we deploy a small team of just six people , and what many people do not know be that be the same size as the rescue effort of healthcare.gov — just six people . and that team jump in , side - by - side , to support the agency in transition this project into more modern business practice , more modern development practice . now , in non - tech speak , what that basically mean be take big , multi - year project and break they up into bite - sized chunk , so that way we can reduce the risk and actually start to see result every couple of week , instead of wait in a black box for year .     so within less than three month of our team be on the ground , we be already able to push our first product to production . the first one , this be the form i-90 . this be use to file for your replacement green card . now , for immigrant visa holder , a replacement green card be a big deal . your green card be your proof of identification , it be your work authorization , it be the proof that you can be here in this country . so wait six month while the government process the replacement be not cool . I be excited to tell you that today , you can now , for the first time , file for a replacement green card entirely online without anyone touch a piece of paper . it be fast , it be cheap , and it be a well user experience for the applicant and the government employee alike .     ( applause )     another one , quickly . last fall , we just release a brand - new practice civic test . so as part of become a us citizen , you have to pass a civic test . for anyone who have take this test , it can be quite the stressful process . so our team release a very easy , simple - to - use tool in plain language to help people prepare , to help ease their nerve , to help they feel more confident in take the next step in pursue their american dream . because all of this work , all of this work on immigration , be about take complicated process and make they more human .     the other day , one of the dedicated civil servant on the ground say something incredibly profound . she say that she be never be this hopeful or optimistic about a project in her entire time in government . and she be be do this for 30 year . that be exactly the kind of hope and culture change we be try to create .     for my second example , I want to bring it back to veteran for a second , and what we be do to build they a va that be worthy of their service and their sacrifice . I be proud to say that just a few month ago , we release a brand - new beta of a new website , vets.gov . vets.gov be a simple , easy - to - use website that bring all of the online service a veteran need into one place . one website , not thousand . the site be a work in progress , but it be significant progress , because it be design with the user who matter most : the veteran themselves . this might sound incredibly obvious , because it should be , but sadly , this be not normal for government . far too often , product decision be make by committee of stakeholder who do their good to represent the interest of the user , but they be not necessarily the user themselves . so our team at the va go out , we look at the datum , we talk to veteran themselves and we start simple and small , with the two most important service that matter most to they : education benefit and disability benefit . I be proud to say that they be live on the site today , and as the team continue to streamline more service , they will be port over here , and the old site , shut down .     ( applause )     to I , this be what change look like in 2016 .     when you walk out of the oval office , the first time I be ever there , I notice a quote the president have embroider on the rug . it be the classic jfk quote . it say , " no problem of human destiny be beyond human being . " it be true . we have the tool to solve these problem . we have the tool to come together as a society , as a country , and to fix this together . yes , it be hard . it be particularly hard when we have to fight , when we have to refuse to succumb to the belief that thing will not change . but in my experience , it be often the hard thing that be the most worth do , because if we do not do they , who will ? this be on we , all of we , together , because government be not an abstract institution or a concept . our government be we .     ( applause )     today , it be no long a question of if change be possible . the question be not , " can we ? " the question be , " will we ? "     will you ?     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   extraordinary claim require extraordinary evidence , and it be my job , my responsibility , as an astronomer to remind people that alien hypothesis should always be a last resort .     now , I want to tell you a story about that . it involve datum from a nasa mission , ordinary people and one of the most extraordinary star in our galaxy .     it begin in 2009 with the launch of nasa 's kepler mission . kepler 's main scientific objective be to find planet outside of our solar system . it do this by stare at a single field in the sky , this one , with all the tiny box . and in this one field , it monitor the brightness of over 150,000 star continuously for four year , take a data point every 30 minute . it be look for what astronomer call a transit . this be when the planet 's orbit be align in our line of sight , just so that the planet crosse in front of a star . and when this happen , it block out a tiny bit of starlight , which you can see as a dip in this curve .     and so the team at nasa have develop very sophisticated computer to search for transit in all the kepler datum .     at the same time of the first data release , astronomer at yale be wonder an interesting thing : what if computer miss something ?     and so we launch the citizen science project call planet hunter to have people look at the same datum . the human brain have an amazing ability for pattern recognition , sometimes even well than a computer . however , there be a lot of skepticism around this . my colleague , debra fischer , founder of the planet hunter project , say that people at the time be say , " you be crazy . there be no way that a computer will miss a signal . " and so it be on , the classic human versus machine gamble . and if we find one planet , we would be thrill . when I join the team four year ago , we have already find a couple . and today , with the help of over 300,000 science enthusiast , we have find dozen , and we 've also find one of the most mysterious star in our galaxy .     so to understand this , let I show you what a normal transit in kepler datum look like . on this graph on the left - hand side you have the amount of light , and on the bottom be time . the white line be light just from the star , what astronomer call a light curve . now , when a planet transit a star , it block out a little bit of this light , and the depth of this transit reflect the size of the object itself . and so , for example , let us take jupiter . planet do not get much big than jupiter . jupiter will make a one percent drop in a star 's brightness . earth , on the other hand , be 11 time small than jupiter , and the signal be barely visible in the datum .     so back to our mystery . a few year ago , planet hunter be sift through datum look for transit , and they spot a mysterious signal come from the star kic 8462852 . the observation in may of 2009 be the first they spot , and they start talk about this in the discussion forum .     they say and object like jupiter would make a drop like this in the star 's light , but they be also say it be giant . you see , transit normally only last for a few hour , and this one last for almost a week .     they be also say that it look asymmetric , mean that instead of the clean , u - shaped dip that we see with jupiter , it have this strange slope that you can see on the left side . this seem to indicate that whatever be get in the way and block the starlight be not circular like a planet . there be few more dip that happen , but for a couple of year , it be pretty quiet .     and then in march of 2011 , we see this . the star 's light drop by a whole 15 percent , and this be huge compare to a planet , which would only make a one percent drop . we describe this feature as both smooth and clean . it also be asymmetric , have a gradual dimming that last almost a week , and then it snap right back up to normal in just a matter of day .     and again , after this , not much happen until february of 2013 . thing start to get really crazy . there be a huge complex of dip in the light curve that appear , and they last for like a hundred day , all the way up into the kepler mission 's end . these dip have variable shape . some be very sharp , and some be broad , and they also have variable duration . some last just for a day or two , and some for more than a week . and there be also up and down trend within some of these dip , almost like several independent event be superimpose on top of each other . and at this time , this star drop in its brightness over 20 percent . this mean that whatever be block its light have an area of over 1,000 time the area of our planet earth .     this be truly remarkable . and so the citizen scientist , when they see this , they notify the science team that they find something weird enough that it might be worth follow up . and so when the science team look at it , we be like , " yeah , there be probably just something wrong with the datum . " but we look really , really , really hard , and the datum be good . and so what be happen have to be astrophysical , mean that something in space be get in the way and block starlight . and so at this point , we set out to learn everything we could about the star to see if we could find any clue to what be go on . and the citizen scientist who help we in this discovery , they join along for the ride watch science in action firsthand .     first , somebody say , you know , what if this star be very young and it still have the cloud of material it be bear from surround it . and then somebody else say , well , what if the star have already form planet , and two of these planet have collide , similar to the earth - moon forming event . well , both of these theory could explain part of the datum , but the difficulty be that the star show no sign of be young , and there be no glow from any of the material that be heat up by the star 's light , and you would expect this if the star be young or if there be a collision and a lot of dust be produce . and so somebody else say , well , how about a huge swarm of comet that be pass by this star in a very elliptical orbit ? well , it end up that this be actually consistent with our observation . but I agree , it do feel a little contrived . you see , it would take hundred of comet to reproduce what we be observe . and these be only the comet that happen to pass between we and the star . and so in reality , we be talk thousand to ten of thousand of comet . but of all the bad idea we have , this one be the good . and so we go ahead and publish our finding .     now , let I tell you , this be one of the hard paper I ever write . scientist be mean to publish result , and this situation be far from that . and so we decide to give it a catchy title , and we call it : " where be the flux ? " I will let you work out the acronym .     ( laughter )     so this be not the end of the story . around the same time I be write this paper , I meet with a colleague of mine , jason wright , and he be also write a paper on kepler datum . and he be say that with kepler 's extreme precision , it could actually detect alien megastructure around star , but it do not . and then I show he this weird datum that our citizen scientist have find , and he say to I , " aw crap , tabby . now I have to rewrite my paper . "     so yes , the natural explanation be weak , and we be curious now . so we have to find a way to rule out alien . so together , we convince a colleague of ours who work on seti , the search for extraterrestrial intelligence , that this would be an extraordinary target to pursue . we write a proposal to observe the star with the world 's large radio telescope at the green bank observatory .     a couple month later , news of this proposal got leak to the press and now there be thousand of article , over 10,000 article , on this star alone . and if you search google image , this be what you 'll find .     now , you may be wonder , ok , tabby , well , how do alien actually explain this light curve ? ok , well , imagine a civilization that be much more advanced than our own . in this hypothetical circumstance , this civilization would have exhaust the energy supply of their home planet , so where could they get more energy ? well , they have a host star just like we have a sun , and so if they be able to capture more energy from this star , then that would solve their energy need . so they would go and build huge structure . these giant megastructure , like ginormous solar panel , be call dyson sphere .     this image above be lot of artist ' impression of dyson sphere . it be really hard to provide perspective on the vastness of these thing , but you can think of it this way . the earth - moon distance be a quarter of a million mile . the simple element on one of these structure be 100 time that size . they be enormous . and now imagine one of these structure in motion around a star . you can see how it would produce anomaly in the datum such as uneven , unnatural look dip .     but it remain that even alien megastructure can not defy the law of physics . you see , anything that use a lot of energy be go to produce heat , and we do not observe this . but it could be something as simple as they be just reradiate it away in another direction , just not at earth .     another idea that be one of my personal favorite be that we have just witness an interplanetary space battle and the catastrophic destruction of a planet . now , I admit that this would produce a lot of dust that we do not observe . but if we be already invoke alien in this explanation , then who be to say they do not efficiently clean up all this mess for recycling purpose ?     ( laughter )     you can see how this quickly capture your imagination .     well , there you have it . we be in a situation that could unfold to be a natural phenomenon we do not understand or an alien technology we do not understand . personally , as a scientist , my money be on the natural explanation . but do not get I wrong , I do think it would be awesome to find alien . either way , there be something new and really interesting to discover .     so what happen next ? we need to continue to observe this star to learn more about what be happen . but professional astronomer , like I , we have limit resource for this kind of thing , and kepler be on to a different mission .     and I be happy to say that once again , citizen scientist have come in and save the day . you see , this time , amateur astronomer with their backyard telescope step up immediately and start observe this star nightly at their own facility , and I be so excited to see what they find .     what be amazing to I be that this star would have never be find by computer because we just be not look for something like this . and what be more exciting be that there be more datum to come . there be new mission that be come up that be observe million more star all over the sky .     and just think : what will it mean when we find another star like this ? and what will it mean if we do not find another star like this ?     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I have spend the past 38 year try to be invisible . I be a copy editor . I work at the new yorker , and copyedit for the new yorker be like play shortstop for a major league baseball team : every little movement gets pick over by the critic — god forbid you should commit an error .     just to clarify : copy editor do not choose what go into the magazine . we work at the level of the sentence , maybe the paragraph , the word , the punctuation . our business be in the detail . we put the diaeresis , the double dot , over the " i " in " naïve . " we impose house style . every publication have a house style . the new yorker 's be particularly distinctive . we sometimes get tease for our style . imagine — we still spell " teen - ager " with a hyphen , as if that word have just be coin . but you see that hyphen in " teen - age " and that diaeresis over " coöperate , " and you know you be read the new yorker .     copyedit at the new yorker be a mechanical process . there be a relate role call query proofreading , or page - ok'ing . whereas copyediting be mechanical , query proofreading be interpretive . we make suggestion to the author through the editor to improve the emphasis of a sentence or point out unintentional repetition and supply compelling alternative . our purpose be to make the author look good .     note that we give our proof not directly to the author , but to the editor . this often create a good cop / bad cop dynamic in which the copy editor — I 'll use that as an umbrella term — be invariably the bad cop . if we do our job well , we be invisible , but as soon as we make a mistake , we copy editor become glaringly visible . here be the most recent mistake that be lay at my door .     [ last tuesday , sarah palin , the pre - trump embodiment of populist no - nothingism in the republican party , endorse trump . ]     " where be the new yorker 's fabled copy editor ? " a reader write . " do not the writer mean ' know - nothingism ' ? "     ouch . there be no excuse for this mistake . but I like it : " no - nothingism . " it might be american vernacular for " nihilism . "     ( laughter )     here , another reader quote a passage from the magazine :     [ ruby be seventy - six , but she retain her authoritative bearing ; only her unsteady gait belie her age . ]     he add : " surely , someone at the new yorker know the meaning of ' belie , ' and that it be the opposite of how it be use in this sentence . come on ! get it together . "     belie : to give a false impression . it should have be " betray . "     e.b . white once write of comma in the new yorker : " they fall with the precision of knife outline a body . "     ( laughter )     and it be true — we get a lot of complaint about comma . " be there really two comma in ' martin luther king , jr . , boulevard ' ? " there may not be on the sign , but yes , that be new yorker style for " jr . " one wag write :     [ " please , could you expel , or , at least , restrain , the comma - maniac , on your editorial staff ? " ]     ( laughter )     ah , well . in this case , those comma be well - place , except that there should not be one between " maniac " and " on . "     ( laughter )     also , if we must have comma around " at least , " we might change it up by use dash around that phrase : " ... — or , at least , restrain — " perfect .     ( applause )     then there be this : " love you , love your magazine , but can you please stop write massive number as text ? "     [ two and a half million ... ]     no .     ( laughter )     one last cri de coeur from a spelling stickler :     [ " those long stringy thing be vocal cord , not chord . " ]     the outraged reader add , " I be sure I be not the first to write regard this egregious proofreading error , but I be equally sure I will not be the last . fie ! "     ( laughter )     I use to like get mail .     there be a pact between writer and editor . the editor never sell out the writer , never go public about bad joke that have to be cut or story that go on too long . a great editor save a writer from her excess . copy editor , too , have a code ; we do not advertise our oversight . I feel disloyal divulge they here , so let us have look at what we do right .     somehow , I 've get a reputation for sternness . but I work with writer who know how to have their way with I . I 've know ian frazier , or " sandy , " since the early 80 . and he be one of my favorite , even though he sometimes write a sentence that give a copy editor pause . here be one from a story about staten island after hurricane sandy :     [ a dock that have be break in the middle and lose its other half slope down toward the water , its support pipe and wire lean forward like when you open a box of linguine and it slide out . ]     ( laughter )     this would never have get past the grammarian in the day of yore . but what could I do ? technically , the " like " should be an " as , " but it sound ridiculous , as if the author be about to embark on an extended homeric simile — " as when you open a box of linguine . "     ( laughter )     I decide that the hurricane confer poetic justice on sandy and let the sentence stand .     ( laughter )     generally , if I think something be wrong , I query it three time . I tell sandy that not long ago in a moment of indiscretion and he say ,     " only three ? "     so , he have learn to hold out .     recently , he write a story for " talk of the town , " that be the section at the front of the magazine with short piece on subject range from ricky jay 's exhibit at the metropolitan museum to the introduction of doggie bag in france . sandy 's story be about the return to the bronx of supreme court justice sonia sotomayor . there be three thing in it that I have to challenge .     first , a grammar query . the justice be wear black and sandy write ,     [ her face and hand stand out like in an old , mostly dark painting . ]     now , unlike with the hurricane , with this " like , " the author do not have the excuse of describe hurricane damage . " like " in this sense be a preposition , and a preposition take an object , which be a noun . this " like " have to be an " as . " " as in an old , mostly dark painting . "     second , a spelling issue . the author be quote someone who be assist the justice :     [ " it will be just a minute . we be get the justice mic'ed , " ]     mic'ed ? the music industry spell it " mic " because that be how it be spell on the equipment . I have never see it use as a verb with this spelling , and I be distraught to think that " mic'ed " would get into the magazine on my watch .     ( laughter )     new yorker style for " microphone " in its abbreviate form be " mike . "     finally , there be a sticky grammar and usage issue in which the pronoun have to have the same grammatical number as its antecedent .     [ everyone in the vicinity hold their breath ]     " their " be plural and " everyone , " its antecedent , be singular . you would never say , " everyone be there . " everyone be there . everyone be here . but people say thing like , " everyone hold their breath " all the time . to give it legitimacy , copy editor call it " the singular ' their , ' " as if call it singular make it no long plural .     ( laughter )     it be my job when I see it in print to do my good to eliminate it . I could not make it , " everyone hold her breath , " or " everyone hold his breath , " or " everyone hold his or her breath . " whatever I suggest have to blend in . I ask , through the editor , if the author would consider change it to " all in the vicinity hold their breath , " because " all " be plural . nope .     I try again : " all those present hold their breath ? " I think this sound vaguely judicial . but the editor point out that we could not have " present " and " presence " in the same sentence . when the final proof come back , the author have accept " as " for " like , " and " mike " for " mic'ed . " but on " everyone hold their breath , " he stand his ground . two out of three be not bad .     in the same issue , in that piece on doggie bag in france , there be the gratuitous use of the f - word by a frenchman . I wonder , when the mail come in , which will have offend the reader more .     ( laughter )     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I have one more reason for optimism : climate change . maybe you do not believe it , but here be the fact .     on december 12 , 2015 , in paris , under the united nations , 195 government get together and unanimously — if you 've work with government , you know how difficult that be — unanimously decide to intentionally change the course of the global economy in order to protect the most vulnerable and improve the life of all of we . now , that be a remarkable achievement .     ( applause )     but it be even more remarkable if you consider where we have be just a few year ago . 2009 , copenhagen . who remember copenhagen ? well , after year of work toward a climate agreement , the same government convene in copenhagen and fail miserably .     why do it fail miserably ? for many different reason , but primarily because of the deeply entrenched divide between the global north and the global south . so now , six month after this failure , I be call in to assume the responsibility of the global climate change negotiation . you can imagine , the perfect moment to start this new job . the global mood on climate change be in the trash can . no one believe that a global agreement could ever be possible . in fact , neither do i. if you promise not to tell anyone outside of this wonderful ted audience , I be go to divulge a secret that have be gratefully bury by history . on my first press conference , a journalist ask , " um , ms . figueres , do you think that a global agreement be ever go to be possible ? " and without engage brain , I hear I utter , " not in my lifetime . " well , you can imagine the face of my press team who be horrify at this crazy costa rican woman who be their new boss . and I be horrified , too . now , I be not horrify at I , because I be kind of used to myself . I be actually horrify at the consequence of what I have just say , at the consequence for the world in which all our child be go to have to live . it be frankly a horrible moment for I , and I think , well , no , hang on , hang on . impossible be not a fact , it be an attitude . it be only an attitude . and I decide right then and there that I be go to change my attitude and I be go to help the world change its attitude on climate change .     so I do not know — no , just this ? thank . I do not know — what you would do if you be tell your job be to save the planet . put that on the job description . and you have full responsibility , but you have absolutely no authority , because government be sovereign in every decision that they take .     well , I would really love to know what you would do on the first monday morning , but here be what I do : I panic .     ( laughter )     and then I panic again , because I realize I have no idea how we be go to solve this problem . and then I realize I have no idea how we be go to solve this problem , but I do know one thing : we have get to change the tone of this conversation . because there be no way you can deliver victory without optimism .     and here , I use optimism as a very simple word , but let us understand it in its broad sense . let us understand it as courage , hope , trust , solidarity , the fundamental belief that we human can come together and can help each other to better the fate of mankind . well , you can imagine that I think that without that , there be no way we be go to get out of the paralysis of copenhagen . and for six year , I have stubbornly , relentlessly inject optimism into the system , no matter what the question from the press — and I have get well at those — and no matter what the evidence to the contrary . and believe you I , there have be a lot of contrary evidence . but relentless optimism into the system .     and pretty soon , we begin to see change happen in many area , precipitate by thousand of people , include many of you here today , and I thank you . and this ted community will not be surprised if I tell you the first area in which we see remarkable change be ... technology . we begin to see that clean technology , in particular renewable energy technology , begin to drop price and increase in capacity , to the point where today we be already build concentrated solar power plant that have the capacity to power entire city , to say nothing of the fact of what we be do on mobility and intelligent building . and with this shift in technology , we be able to begin to understand that there be a shift in the economic equation , because we be able to recognize that yes , there be huge cost to climate change , and yes , there be compound risk . but there also be economic advantage and intrinsic benefit , because the dissemination of the clean technology be go to bring we clean air , well health , well transportation , more livable city , more energy security , more energy access to the develop world . in sum , a well world than what we have now .     and with that understanding , you should have witness , in fact , part of you be , the spread of ingenuity and excitement that go through , first through nonnational government , the private sector , captain of industry , insurance company , investor , city leader , faith community , because you all begin to understand , this actually can be in their interest . this can actually improve their bottom line .     and it be not just the usual suspect . I have to tell you I have the ceo of a major , major oil and gas company come to I at the beginning of last year and say — privately , of course — he do not know how he be go to change his company , but he be go to change it , because he be interested in long - term viability . well , now we have a shift in the economic equation , and with that , with broad support from everyone , it do not take very long before we see that national government wake up to the fact that this be in their national interest . and when we ask country to begin to identify how they could contribute to global effort but base on their national interest , 189 country out of 195 , 189 country send their comprehensive climate change plan , base on their national interest , concurrent with their priority , consistent with their national sustainable development plan .     well , once you protect the core interest of nation , then you can understand that nation be ready to begin to converge onto a common path , onto a common direction of travel that be go to take we probably several decade , but over those several decade be go to take we into the new economy , into a decarbonize , highly resilient economy , and the national contribution that be currently on the table on behalf of national government be insufficient to get we to a stabilized climate , but they be only the first step , and they will improve over time . and the measurement , reporting and verification of all of those effort be legally binding . and the checkpoint that we be go to have every five year to assess collective progress towards our goal be legally binding , and the path itself toward a decarbonized and more resilient economy be legally binding .     and here be the more important part : what do we have before ? a very small handful of country who have undertake very reduced , short - term emission reduction commitment that be completely insufficient and furthermore , largely perceive as a burden . now what do we have ? now we have all country of the world contribute with different intensity from different approach in different sector , but all of they contribute to a common goal and along a path with environmental integrity . well , once you have all of this in place and you have shift this understanding , then you see that government be able to go to paris and adopt the paris agreement .     ( applause )     so , as I look back over the past six year , first I remember the day the paris agreement be adopt . I can not tell you the euphoria in the room . 5,000 people jump out of their seat , crying , clapping , scream , yell , tear between euphoria and still disbelief at what they have just see , because so many people have work for year towards this , and this be finally their reality .     and it be not just those who have participate directly . a few week ago , I be with a colleague who be try to decide on a tahitian pearl that he want to give to his wonderful wife natasha . and once he have finally decide what he be go to buy , the jeweler say to he , " you know , you be very lucky that you be buy this now , because these pearl could go extinct very soon because of climate change . " " but , " the jeweler say , " have you hear , the government have just come to a decision , and tahiti could have a chance . " well , what a fantastic confirmation that perhaps , perhaps here be hope , here be a possible chance . I be the first one to recognize that we have a lot of work still to do . we 've only just start our work on climate change . and in fact , we need to make sure that we redouble our effort over the next five year that be the urgent five year . but I do believe that we have come over the past six year from the impossible to the now unstoppable . and how do we do that ? by inject transformational optimism that allow we to go from confrontation to collaboration , that allow we to understand that national and local interest be not necessarily at odd with global need , and that if we understand that , we can bring they together and we can merge they harmoniously .     and as I look forward to other global issue that will require our attention this century — food security , water security , home security , force migration — I see that we certainly do not know how we be go to solve those problem yet . but we can take a page out of what we have do on climate change and we can understand that we have get to reinterpret the zero - sum mentality . because we be train to believe that there always be winner and loser , and that your loss be my gain . well , now that we be in a world in which we have reach planetary boundary and that we be not just so interconnect , but increasingly interdependent on each other , your loss be no long my gain . we be either all loser or we all can be winner . but we be go to have to decide between zero and sum . we be go to have to decide between zero benefit for all or live life as the sum of all of we . we 've do it once . we can do it again .     thank .     ( applause )  
   how much do you need to know about a person before you would feel comfortable make a loan ?     suppose you want to lend 1,000 dollar to the person sit two row behind you . what would you need to know about that person before you would feel comfortable ?     my mom come to the us from india in her late thirty . she be a doctor in brooklyn , and she often let friend and neighbor come to see she for health service , whether they can pay right away or not . I remember run into her patient with she at the grocery store or on the sidewalk , and sometimes they would come and pay she right on the spot for previous appointment . she would thank they , and ask they about their family and their health . she give they credit because she trust they .     most of we be like my mom . we would give credit to someone we know or that we live next to . but most of we be probably not go to lend to a stranger unless we know a little something about they .     bank , credit card company and other financial institution do not know we on a personal level , but they do have a way of trust we , and that be through our credit score . our credit score have be create through an aggregation and analysis of our public consumer credit datum . and because of they , we have pretty much easy access to all of the good and service that we need , from get electricity to buy a home , or take a risk and start a business .     but ... there be 2.5 billion people around the world that do not have a credit score . that be a third of the world 's population . they do not have a score because there be no formal public record on they — no bank account , no credit history and no social security number . and because they do not have a score , they do not have access to the credit or financial product that can improve their life . they be not trust .     so we want to find a way to build trust and to open up financial access for these 2.5 billion . so we create a mobile application that build credit score for they use mobile datum . there be currently over one billion smartphone in emerge market . and people be use they the same way that we do . they be texte their friend , they be look up direction , they be browse the internet and they be even make financial transaction .     over time , this data be getting capture on our phone , and it provide a really rich picture of a person 's life . our customer give we access to this datum and we capture it through our mobile application . it help we understand the creditworthiness of people like jenipher , a small - business owner in nairobi , kenya . jenipher be 65 year old , and for decade have be run a food stall in the central business district . she have three son who she put through vocational school , and she be also the leader of her local chama , or saving group .     jenipher 's food stall do well . she make just enough every day to cover her expense . but she be not financially secure . any emergency could force she into debt . and she have no discretionary income to improve her family 's way of living , for emergency , or for invest into grow her business . if jenipher want credit , her option be limited . she could get a microloan , but she would have to form a group that could help vouch for her credibility . and even then , the loan size would be way too small to really have an impact on her business , average around 150 dollar . loan shark be always an option , but with interest rate that be well above 300 percent , they be financially risky . and because jenipher do not have collateral or a credit history , she can not walk into a bank and ask for a business loan .     but one day , jenipher 's son convince she to download our application and apply for a loan . jenipher answer a few question on her phone and she give we access to a few key datum point on her device .     and here be what we see . so , bad news first . jenipher have a low saving balance and no previous loan history . these be factor that would have throw up a red flag to a traditional bank . but there be other point in her history that show we a much rich picture of her potential . so for one , we see that she make regular phone call to her family in uganda . well , it turn out that the datum show a four percent increase in repayment among people who consistently communicate with a few close contact . we could also see that though she travel around a lot throughout the day , she actually have pretty regular travel pattern , and she be either at home or at her food stall . and the datum show a six percent increase in repayment among customer who be consistent with where they spend most of their time .     we could also see that she communicate a lot with many different people throughout the day and that she have a strong support network . our datum show that people who communicate with more than 58 different contact tend to be more likely to be good borrower . in jenipher 's case , she communicate with 89 different individual , which show a nine percent increase in her repayment .     these be just some of the thousand of different datum point that we look at to understand a person 's creditworthiness . and after you all of these different data point , we take the first risk and give jenipher a loan . this be datum that would not be find on a paper trail or in any formal financial record . but it prove trust . by look beyond income , we can see that people in emerge market that may seem risky and unpredictable on the surface be actually willing and have the capacity to repay .     our credit score have help we deliver over 200,000 loan in kenya in just the past year . and our repayment rate be above 90 percent — which , by the way , be in line with traditional bank repayment rate .     with something as simple as a credit score , we be give people the power to build their own future . our customer have use their loan for family expense , emergency , travel and for invest back into grow their business . they be now build well economy and community where more people can succeed .     over the past two year of use our product , jenipher have increase her saving by 60 percent . she be also start two additional food stall and be now make plan for her own restaurant . she be apply for a small - business loan from a commercial bank , because she now have the credit history to prove she deserve it .     I see jenipher in nairobi just last week , and she tell I how excited she be to get start . she say , " only my son believe I could do this . I do not think this be for I . " she be live her whole life believe that there be a part of the world that be close off to she .     our job now be to open the world to jenipher and the billion like she that deserve to be trust .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   hello . this be my first trip , first time in life I be outside of the wall of gaza . I be so happy to be here .     ( applause )     my ambition always be to be a pilot , to fly a plane , to feel free to fly the sky , to touch the sky . but that do not happen . simply , I live in gaza , there be no airport . all border be close on every side . we live in one of the big prison in the world . the only thing I can do be just to look up to the sky . on some day , we be lucky if we have electricity for four or five hour . when it be cold , we make a fire on the front or on the roof of our home . sometimes we make food , too .     my job in gaza be to arrange everything for journalist who come to my homeland to tell the story about what be go on in gaza . many morning , I have to go to the border area to collect a journalist . if anything should happen to the journalist , or if the journalist decide to cover a story the government do not want we to cover , bad thing could happen .     navigate through my country help journalist , filmmaker , news crew , be my work life . I believe my success come from build a relationship not only with journalist and the news crew , but also with the community in the gaza strip . these community who do not want their story to be tell , I never look to they as story or number . but like I , they be human being .     I have build up many relationship over 10 year . and guess what ? this give I the chance to get access to people , to story that other can not . in some certain situation , I feel , as a woman , I have more power . many male journalist in my society , they want to cover a story about drug addiction in my country . that problem start when the gaza tunnel be be build . with the siege on gaza , tunnel bring people all the basic need like food , building material , other stuff we need . but not anymore , because the egyptian side flood they up with water and they be not work anymore . drug be be smuggle , and many young people get addict , too . in the tradition of the palestinian society , it be forbid for man to enter the household . so , no male journalist get the story . but I do .     I have a wonderful husband , a wonderful husband who support I despite all the criticism he get from the society . he be at home now with my two kid , and I have another one that be grow in here .     ( applause )     when I be work , I call he every two hour , and he know if he do not hear from I , he should call my contact , the one who give I access to the story , which be the one who I trust .     one of the time in gaza , during the kidnapping of the british journalist alan johnston , I be ask by an american magazine to set up a meeting with the kidnapper in gaza , and I do . the journalist cover the story and I be ask to meet outside of his hotel . they come , they pick we up in a black van with black window , they be wear mask on that day . and they drive we away , far away in the middle of a field . they take our cell phone and we do the interview with the kidnapper outside in that field . I be so scared that day , a day I will never forget .     so , why do I do what I do ? I do it because I believe if I do not , a huge part of the story about gaza will be miss . there be some more story I could tell you about my country . and not all of they be bad . I love my country , despite the terrible situation we live in — siege , poverty , unemployment — but there be life . there be people who be dreamer and amazing people full of energy . we have wonderful music , and a great music school . we have parkour dancer who dance in the rubble of their home . and gaza be the only place in the arab world where muslims and christians live in strong brotherhood .     ( applause )     during the time of war , the hard part for I be leave the house early in the morning , leave my child . I take a picture of they everyday because I never know if I will make it back to they . be a fixer and a journalist be difficult and dangerous in gaza . but when I hear the sound of the shelling or the sound of the bombing , I just head straight toward it , because I want to be there first , because these story should be tell .     when my child be small and we hear the sound of the war , I use to tell they that they be firework . now they be old , they understand . I do have terrible nightmare because of all that I witness during war time , especially these lifeless body of young child . I still remember a little girl , her name be hala . she be the only survivor from her family . her picture will be with I forever . I will never forget she .     I be proud that I can stand here and be here today with you . I be proud that I can tell you story , sad and happy , story about my small corner of the world , gaza . I be proud that I be the first female fixer work in gaza . and the funny thing be they call I mr . rambo in gaza .     ( laughter )     I hope one day , I will get the chance to tell the story of all other woman , all other amazing woman I know in my country . I hope that one day I can help other woman in my country to be fixer like I . and of course sometimes , I feel I can not do this work anymore , it be just too much for I . but I remember these word : " do not limit your challenge , but challenge your limit . do not allow other to stand in front of your dream . "     thank you .     ( applause )  
   design be a slippery and elusive phenomenon , which have mean different thing at different time . but all truly inspire design project have one thing in common : they begin with a dream . and the bold the dream , the great the design feat that will be require to achieve it . and this be why the great designer be almost always the big dreamer and rebel and renegade .     this have be the case throughout history , all the way back to the year 300 bc , when a 13 - year - old become the king of a remote , very poor and very small asian country . he dream of acquire land , rich and power through military conquest . and his design skill — improbable though it sound — would be essential in enable he to do so .     at the time , all weapon be make by hand to different specification . so if an archer run out of arrow during a battle , they would not necessarily be able to fire another archer 's arrow from their bow . this of course mean that they would be less effective in combat and very vulnerable , too . ying solve this problem by insist that all bow and arrow be design identically , so they be interchangeable . and he do the same for dagger , axis , spear , shield and every other form of weaponry . his formidably equip army win batter after battle , and within 15 year , his tiny kingdom have succeed in conquer all its large , rich , more powerful neighbor , to find the mighty chinese empire .     now , no one , of course , would have think of describe ying zheng as a designer at the time — why would they ? and yet he use design unknowingly and instinctively but with tremendous ingenuity to achieve his end . and so do another equally improbable , accidental designer , who be also not above use violence to get what he want . this be edward teach , well know as the british pirate , blackbeard .     this be the golden age of piracy , where pirate like teach be terrorize the high sea . colonial trade be flourish , and piracy be highly profitable . and the smart pirate like he realize that to maximize their spoil , they need to attack their enemy so brutally that they would surrender on sight . so in other word , they could take the ship without waste ammunition , or incur casualty .     so edward teach redesign himself as blackbeard by play the part of a merciless brute . he wear heavy jacket and big hat to accentuate his height . he grow the bushy black beard that obscure his face . he sling brace of pistol on either shoulder . he even attach match to the brim of his hat and set they alight , so they sizzle menacingly whenever his ship be poise to attack . and like many pirate of that era , he fly a flag that bear the macabre symbol of a human skull and a pair of crossed bone , because those motif have signify death in so many culture for century , that their meaning be instantly recognizable , even in the lawless , illiterate world of the high sea : surrender or you 'll suffer . so of course , all his sensible victim surrender on sight .     put like that , it be easy to see why edward teach and his fellow pirate could be see as pioneer of modern communication design , and why their deadly symbol —     ( laughter )     there be more — why their deadly symbol of the skull and crossbone be a precursor of today 's logo , rather like the big red letter stand behind I , but of course with a different message .     ( laughter )     yet design be also use to nobler end by an equally brilliant and equally improbable designer , the 19th - century british nurse , florence nightingale . her mission be to provide decent healthcare for everyone . nightingale be bear into a rather grand , very wealthy british family , who be horrify when she volunteer to work in military hospital during the crimean war . once there , she swiftly realize that more patient be die of infection that they catch there , in the filthy , fetid ward , than they be of battle wound . so she campaign for clean , lighter , airier clinic to be design and build .     back in britain , she mount another campaign , this time for civilian hospital , and insist that the same design principle be apply to they . the nightingale ward , as it be call , dominate hospital design for decade to come , and element of it be still use today . but by then , design be see as a tool of the industrial age . it be formalize and professionalize , but it be restrict to specific role and generally apply in pursuit of commercial goal rather than be use intuitively , as florence nightingale , blackbeard and ying zheng have do .     by the 20th century , this commercial ethos be so powerful , that any designer who deviate from it risk be see as crank or subversive .     now among they be one of my great design hero , the brilliant lászló moholy - nagy . he be the hungarian artist and designer whose experiment with the impact of technology on daily life be so powerful that they still influence the design of the digital image we see on our phone and computer screen . he radicalize the bauhaus design school in 1920s germany , and yet some of his former colleague shun he when he struggle to open a new bauhaus in chicago year later . moholy 's idea be as bold and incisive as ever , but his approach to design be too experimental , as be his insistence on see it , as he put it , as an attitude , not a profession to be in tune with the time .     and sadly , the same apply to another design maverick : richard buckminster fuller . he be yet another brilliant design visionary and design activist , who be completely commit to design a sustainable society in such a forward - think way that he start talk about the importance of environmentalism in design in the 1920 . now he , despite his effort , be routinely mock as a crank by many in the design establishment , and admittedly , some of his experiment fail , like the fly car that never get off the ground . and yet , the geodesic dome , his design formula to build an emergency shelter from scrap of wood , metal , plastic , bit of tree , old blanket , plastic sheeting — just about anything that be available at the time — be one of the great feat of humanitarian design , and have provide sorely need refuge to many , many people in desperate circumstance ever since .     now , it be the courage and verve of radical designer like bucky and moholy that draw I to design . I begin my career as a news journalist and foreign correspondent . I write about politic , economic and corporate affair , and I could have choose to specialize in any of those field . but I pick design , because I believe it be one of the most powerful tool at our disposal to improve our quality of life .     thank you , fellow ted design buff .     ( applause )     and greatly as I admire the achievement of professional designer , which have be extraordinary and immense , I also believe that design benefit hugely from the originality , the lateral thinking and the resourcefulness of its rebel and renegade . and we be live at a remarkable moment in design , because this be a time when the two camp be come close together . because even very basic advance in digital technology have enable they to operate increasingly independently , in or out of a commercial context , to pursue ever more ambitious and eclectic objective .     so in theory , basic platform like crowdfunde , cloud computing , social medium be give great freedom to professional designer and give more resource for the improvisational one , and hopefully , a more receptive response to their idea .     now , some of my favorite example of this be in africa , where a new generation of designer be develop incredible internet of thing technology to fulfill florence nightingale 's dream of improve healthcare in country where more people now have access to cell phone than to clean , running water .     and among they be arthur zang . he be a young , cameroonian design engineer who have a adapt a tablet computer into the cardiopad , a mobile heart - monitor device . it can be use to monitor the heart of patient in remote , rural area . the datum be then send on a cellular network to well - equip hospital hundred of mile away for analysis . and if any problem be spot by the specialist there , a suitable course of treatment be recommend . and this of course save many patient from make long , arduous , expensive and often pointless journey to those hospital , and make it much , much likeli that their heart will actually be check .     arthur zang start work on the cardiopad eight year ago , in his final year at university . but he fail to persuade any conventional source to give he investment to get the project off the ground . he post the idea on facebook , where a cameroonian government official see it and manage to secure a government grant for he . he be now develop not only the cardiopad , but other mobile medical device to treat different condition .     and he be not alone , because there be many other inspiring and enterprising designer who be also pursue extraordinary project of their own . and I be go to finish by look at just a few of they . one be peek vision . this be a group of doctor and designer in kenya , who 've develop an internet of thing technology of their own , as a portable eye examination kit . then there be gabriel maher , who be develop a new design language to enable we to articulate the subtlety of our change gender identity , without recourse to traditional stereotype .     all of these designer and many more be pursue their dream , by the making the most of their newfound freedom , with the discipline of professional designer and the resourcefulness of rebel and renegade . and we all stand to benefit .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   do I look real to you ? hope so . I have no idea if you be see this , but I be just go to look ahead and trust that you be there . I 've draw a semicircle in the sand in front of I so I do not walk past it and look like I be float in midair .     right now I be stand in the open air , on a beach under a palm tree , in the exact spot where your stage use to be . I have 12 minute with you . I set a limit . my wife navid once say that infinite possibility be a creator 's bad enemy . for example , this dress : I have ask she to design something that a priest might have wear in 23rd - century cairo . but we only have three day to make it , and the only fabric we have be an old duvet cover that another resident leave behind . but she do it , and it be perfect . and she look at it and say , " proof of concept — creation need constraint . " so with these 12 minute , I be go to tell you about my great discovery .     for my whole life , my obsession have be eternal life , as I know it be so many of your . you may be happy to know that your research will pay off . I be 318 year old . the average human lifespan be now 432 year , and my work have be to extend the human lifespan indefinitely . and I 've never question that someday , we 'll reach a point where we 'll be content . but the opposite keep happen : the long we live , the long we want to live , the less we want to die .     who can blame we ? the universe be so big . there will not ever not be more to see . just yesterday , I be read about how you can take out a boat on europa and sail from island to island all over the planet , and some of the island have village that you can stay and visit and sleep under the shadow of jupiter . and then there be this other island where there be just one songwriter who sit and play mandolin for the ocean . and then there be other where there be no one and there never have be , and so you go just for the pleasure of touch your foot to sand that no foot have ever touch before . you could spend 400 year do just that .     right now the moon be rise in the northeast . I can see the city on it with my naked eye . they be connect like nerve cluster : mariapoli on the south pole , and ramachandran on the equator . and new tehran in the sea of tranquility .     that be where navid and I meet . we be both artist downtown . the day we meet , we be pass each other in azadi square , and we bump shoulder . and I turn to apologize and she , without say hello or introduce herself or anything , say , " well , why do you think we do not just pass through each other ? " and first of all , I think , " who the hell be you ? " but second , the question annoy I , because the answer be so simple . I say , " we do not pass through each other because elementary particle have mass and because the space between elementary particle be fill with the bind energy that also have the property of mass , and we 've know that for 800 year . " she must have be in one of those mood where she like to mess with stranger . or maybe she be just flirt with I , because she look at I and say , " I think you would say that . think deeply . " and then she take off her belt , this belt that I be wear now , and she say , " our universe be build so that particle have mass . without that basic constraint , we would have just pass right through each other at the speed of light and never even know . "     and that be how our romance begin . navid and I never run out of thing to talk about . never . it be incredible . it be like we be both hero climb up into a mountain range together and we keep arrive at new vista , and these new , perfect constellation of word would come out of we to describe they . and we would forget they as soon as we make they , and throw they over our shoulder and go on to the next thing , on and up . or one time , navid say that our talk be like we be always make bread , and that we be always add in a little more flour and a little more water , and fold it in and turn it over and never get around to bake it .     if my obsession be eternal life , navid 's obsession be touch . she have a genius for it . all of her work revolve around it . my body be like a canvas for she , and she would draw her fingertip down over my face so slowly that I could not feel it move . and she be obsess with the exact moment when I would stop be able to tell the difference between her body and mine . or she would just lie across I and dig her shoulder into mine and say , " pilar , why do this feel so good ? " I would say , " I do not know ! " and she always have a facetious answer for her facetious question , but the answer I remember today be , " it feel good because the universe choose its constraint , and we be its art . "     it be always funny what you think the future be go to be like versus what it turn out to be . in your time , scientist think human could freeze themselves and wake up in the future . and they do — but then they die . in your time , scientist think human could replace organ and extend life for hundred of year . and they do , but eventually , they die anyway . in your time , earth be the only place people live . in my time , earth be the place people come to die .     so when navid start to show the sign , our friend assume I would do what everyone do , which be say goodbye and send she to earth , so that none of we would have to look at she or be around she or think about she and she ... failure to keep live . more than anything , they do not want to be around her actual physical body . they keep refer to it as " decline , " even though she herself be fascinate by it , the change it be go through , follow the rule of its nature day by day , independent of her will . I do send navid to earth . but I come with she . I remember a friend of ours , just before we leave , say , " I just think it be arrogant , like the rule do not apply to you , like you think your love be that special . " but I do .     so , even here on earth , I keep work on how to extend life . it do not occur to I that there could be any other response . I keep go back to that thing that navid say to I that day in azadi square , that without that basic constraint — a universe that grant mass to matter — we would not exist . that be one rule . another rule be that all mass be subject to entropy . and there be no way to be in this universe without mass . I know . I try everything . I try create a photon box where the higgs field be alter . I try record all subatomic movement in my body and replay they on closed loop . nothing work .     but my final innovation be to create a coil dimension with the boundary of a body in which time move infinitely slow , but whose projection would appear to move in normal time . that body would then appear in our universe as a hologram — here but not here . when I realize I would do it , I run to her room , so happy to tell she I would do it , move through space almost normally to all eye , even to my own , and go to lie down next to she , and forgot , and fall right through she . I would find a way to eternal life , at the expense of the one thing navid love most , which be to touch and be touch . and she throw I out . I still get to watch , though .     human live 400 year now , and we still die . and when death come , the dying still pick at their bedsheet , and their arm break out in blue and violet bloom on the inside , and their breath get furth and far apart , like they be fall asleep .     I 've always think that what give a life meaning be adventure . and death be just a problem we have not discover the solution to yet . but maybe a life have mean only because it end . maybe that be the paradox : constraint do not constrain , they allow perfect freedom .     ( sigh )     there be a thunderstorm here this morning . there be another forecast for tonight , but for now the sky be clear . I can not feel the wind here , but I just ask one of the caretaker who pass by what it feel like , and she say it feel warm , like melt butter . an answer worthy of my wife . I have to find my way back to the flesh . until then , I take up no space but the space you give I .  
   so this be a talk about gene drive , but I be go to start by tell you a brief story . 20 year ago , a biologist name anthony james got obsess with the idea of make mosquito that do not transmit malaria .     it be a great idea , and pretty much a complete failure . for one thing , it turn out to be really hard to make a malaria - resistant mosquito . james manage it , finally , just a few year ago , by add some gene that make it impossible for the malaria parasite to survive inside the mosquito .     but that just create another problem . now that you 've get a malaria - resistant mosquito , how do you get it to replace all the malaria - carry mosquito ? there be a couple option , but plan a be basically to breed up a bunch of the new genetically - engineer mosquito release they into the wild and hope that they pass on their gene . the problem be that you would have to release literally 10 time the number of native mosquito to work . so in a village with 10,000 mosquito , you release an extra 100,000 . as you might guess , this be not a very popular strategy with the villager .     ( laughter )     then , last january , anthony james get an email from a biologist name ethan bier . bier say that he and his grad student valentino gantz have stumble on a tool that could not only guarantee that a particular genetic trait would be inherit , but that it would spread incredibly quickly . if they be right , it would basically solve the problem that he and james have be work on for 20 year .     as a test , they engineer two mosquito to carry the anti - malaria gene and also this new tool , a gene drive , which I 'll explain in a minute . finally , they set it up so that any mosquito that have inherit the anti - malaria gene would not have the usual white eye , but would instead have red eye . that be pretty much just for convenience so they could tell just at a glance which be which .     so they take their two anti - malarial , red - eyed mosquito and put they in a box with 30 ordinary white - eyed one , and let they breed . in two generation , those have produce 3,800 grandchild . that be not the surprising part . this be the surprising part : give that you start with just two red - eyed mosquito and 30 white - eyed one , you expect mostly white - eyed descendant . instead , when james open the box , all 3,800 mosquito have red eye .     when I ask ethan bi about this moment , he become so excited that he be literally shout into the phone . that be because get only red - eyed mosquito violate a rule that be the absolute cornerstone of biology , mendelian genetic . I 'll keep this quick , but mendelian genetic say when a male and a female mate , their baby inherit half of its dna from each parent . so if our original mosquito be aa and our new mosquito be ab , where b be the anti - malarial gene , the baby should come out in four permutation : aa , ab , aa , ba . instead , with the new gene drive , you all come out ab . biologically , that should not even be possible .     so what happen ? the first thing that happen be the arrival of a gene - editing tool know as crispr in 2012 . many of you have probably hear about crispr , so I 'll just say briefly that crispr be a tool that allow researcher to edit gene very precisely , easily and quickly . it do this by harness a mechanism that already exist in bacteria . basically , there be a protein that act like a scissor and cut the dna , and there be an rna molecule that direct the scissor to any point on the genome you want . the result be basically a word processor for gene . you can take an entire gene out , put one in , or even edit just a single letter within a gene . and you can do it in nearly any specie .     ok , remember how I say that gene drive originally have two problem ? the first be that it be hard to engineer a mosquito to be malaria - resistant . that be basically go now , thank to crispr . but the other problem be logistical . how do you get your trait to spread ? this be where it get clever .     a couple year ago , a biologist at harvard name kevin esvelt wonder what would happen if you make it so that crispr insert not only your new gene but also the machinery that do the cutting and pasting . in other word , what if crispr also copy and paste itself . you would end up with a perpetual motion machine for gene editing . and that be exactly what happen . this crispr gene drive that esvelt create not only guarantee that a trait will get pass on , but if it be use in the germline cell , it will automatically copy and paste your new gene into both chromosome of every single individual . it be like a global search and replace , or in science term , it make a heterozygous trait homozygous .     so , what do this mean ? for one thing , it mean we have a very powerful , but also somewhat alarm new tool . up until now , the fact that gene drive do not work very well be actually kind of a relief . normally when we mess around with an organism 's gene , we make that thing less evolutionarily fit . so biologist can make all the mutant fruit fly they want without worry about it . if some escape , natural selection just take care of they .     what be remarkable and powerful and frightening about gene drive be that that will no long be true . assume that your trait do not have a big evolutionary handicap , like a mosquito that can not fly , the crispr - base gene drive will spread the change relentlessly until it be in every single individual in the population . now , it be not easy to make a gene drive that work that well , but james and esvelt think that we can .     the good news be that this open the door to some remarkable thing . if you put an anti - malarial gene drive in just 1 percent of anophele mosquito , the specie that transmit malaria , researcher estimate that it would spread to the entire population in a year . so in a year , you could virtually eliminate malaria . in practice , we be still a few year out from be able to do that , but still , a 1,000 child a day die of malaria . in a year , that number could be almost zero . the same go for dengue fever , chikungunya , yellow fever .     and it get well . say you want to get rid of an invasive specie , like get asian carp out of the great lake . all you have to do be release a gene drive that make the fish produce only male offspring . in a few generation , there 'll be no female leave , no more carp . in theory , this mean we could restore hundred of native specie that have be push to the brink .     ok , that be the good news , this be the bad news . gene drive be so effective that even an accidental release could change an entire specie , and often very quickly . anthony james take good precaution . he breed his mosquito in a bio - containment lab and he also use a specie that be not native to the we so that even if some do escape , they would just die off , there would be nothing for they to mate with . but it be also true that if a dozen asian carp with the all - male gene drive accidentally got carry from the great lake back to asia , they could potentially wipe out the native asian carp population . and that be not so unlikely , give how connected our world be . in fact , it be why we have an invasive species problem . and that be fish . thing like mosquito and fruit fly , there be literally no way to contain they . they cross border and ocean all the time .     ok , the other piece of bad news be that a gene drive might not stay confine to what we call the target specie . that be because of gene flow , which be a fancy way of say that neighboring specie sometimes interbreed . if that happen , it be possible a gene drive could cross over , like asian carp could infect some other kind of carp . that be not so bad if your drive just promote a trait , like eye color . in fact , there be a decent chance that we 'll see a wave of very weird fruit fly in the near future . but it could be a disaster if your drive be deign to eliminate the specie entirely .     the last worrisome thing be that the technology to do this , to genetically engineer an organism and include a gene drive , be something that basically any lab in the world can do . an undergraduate can do it . a talented high schooler with some equipment can do it .     now , I be guess that this sound terrifying .     ( laughter )     interestingly though , nearly every scientist I talk to seem to think that gene drive be not actually that frightening or dangerous . partly because they believe that scientist will be very cautious and responsible about use they .     ( laughter )     so far , that be be true . but gene drive also have some actual limitation . so for one thing , they work only in sexually reproduce specie . so thank goodness , they can not be use to engineer virus or bacteria . also , the trait spread only with each successive generation . so change or eliminate a population be practical only if that species have a fast reproductive cycle , like insect or maybe small vertebrate like mouse or fish . in elephant or people , it would take century for a trait to spread widely enough to matter .     also , even with crispr , it be not that easy to engineer a truly devastating trait . say you want to make a fruit fly that feed on ordinary fruit instead of rot fruit , with the aim of sabotage american agriculture . first , you would have to figure out which gene control what the fly want to eat , which be already a very long and complicated project . then you would have to alter those gene to change the fly 's behavior to whatever you would want it to be , which be an even long and more complicated project . and it might not even work , because the gene that control behavior be complex . so if you be a terrorist and have to choose between start a gruele basic research program that will require year of meticulous lab work and still might not pan out , or just blow stuff up ? you 'll probably choose the later .     this be especially true because at least in theory , it should be pretty easy to build what be call a reversal drive . that be one that basically overwrite the change make by the first gene drive . so if you do not like the effect of a change , you can just release a second drive that will cancel it out , at least in theory .     ok , so where do this leave we ? we now have the ability to change entire specie at will . should we ? be we god now ? I be not sure I would say that . but I would say this : first , some very smart people be even now debate how to regulate gene drive . at the same time , some other very smart people be work hard to create safeguard , like gene drive that self - regulate or peter out after a few generation . that be great . but this technology still require a conversation . and give the nature of gene drive , that conversation have to be global . what if kenya want to use a drive but tanzania do not ? who decide whether to release a gene drive that can fly ?     I do not have the answer to that question . all we can do go forward , I think , be talk honestly about the risk and benefit and take responsibility for our choice . by that I mean , not just the choice to use a gene drive , but also the choice not to use one . human have a tendency to assume that the safe option be to preserve the status quo . but that be not always the case . gene drive have risk , and those need to be discuss , but malaria exist now and kill 1,000 people a day . to combat it , we spray pesticide that do grave damage to other specie , include amphibian and bird .     so when you hear about gene drive in the come month , and trust I , you will be hear about they , remember that . it can be frightening to act , but sometimes , not act be bad .     ( applause )  
   by raise your hand , how many of you know at least one person on the screen ? wow , it be almost a full house . it be true , they be very famous in their field . and do you know what all of they have in common ? you all die of pancreatic cancer . however , although it be very , very sad this news , it be also thank to their personal story that we have raise awareness of how lethal this disease can be .     it be become the third cause of cancer death , and only eight percent of the patient will survive beyond five year . that be a very tiny number , especially if you compare it with breast cancer , where the survival rate be almost 90 percent . so it do not really come as a surprise that be diagnose with pancreatic cancer mean face an almost certain death sentence . what be shocking , though , be that in the last 40 year , this number have not change a bit , while much more progress have be make with other type of tumor . so how can we make pancreatic cancer treatment more effective ? as a biomedical entrepreneur , I like to work on problem that seem impossible , understand their limitation and try to find new , innovative solution that can change their outcome .     the first piece of bad news with pancreatic cancer be that your pancreas be in the middle of your belly , literally . it be depict in orange on the screen . but you can barely see it until I remove all the other organ in front . it be also surround by many other vital organ , like the liver , the stomach , the bile duct . and the ability of the tumor to grow into those organ be the reason why pancreatic cancer be one of the most painful tumor type . the hard - to - reach location also prevent the doctor from surgically remove it , as be routinely do for breast cancer , for example . so all of these reason leave chemotherapy as the only option for the pancreatic cancer patient .     this bring we to the second piece of bad news . pancreatic cancer tumor have very few blood vessel . why should we care about the blood vessel of a tumor ? let us think for a second how chemotherapy work . the drug be inject in the vein and it navigate throughout the body until it reach the tumor site . it be like drive on a highway , try to reach a destination . but what if your destination do not have an exit on the highway ? you will never get there . and that be exactly the same problem for chemotherapy and pancreatic cancer . the drug navigate throughout all of your body . they will reach healthy organ , result in high toxic effect for the patient overall , but very little will go to the tumor . therefore , the efficacy be very limited .     to I , it seem very counterintuitive to have a whole - body treatment to target a specific organ . however , in the last 40 year , a lot of money , research and effort have go towards find new , powerful drug to treat pancreatic cancer , but nothing have be do in change the way we deliver they to the patient .     so after two piece of bad news , I be go to give you good news , hopefully . with a collaborator at mit and the massachusetts general hospital in boston , we have revolutionize the way we treat cancer by make localized drug delivery a reality . we be basically parachute you on top of your destination , avoid your have to drive all around the highway . we have embed the drug into device that look like this one . they be flexible enough that they can be fold to fit into the catheter , so the doctor can implant it directly on top of the tumor with minimally invasive surgery . but they be solid enough that once they be position on top of the tumor , they will act as a cage . they will actually physically prevent the tumor from enter other organ , control the metastasis .     the device be also biodegradable . that mean that once in the body , they start dissolve , deliver the drug only locally , slowly and more effectively than what be do with the current whole - body treatment . in pre - clinical study , we have demonstrate that this localize approach be able to improve by 12 time the response to treatment .     so we take a drug that be already know and by just deliver it locally where it be need the most , we allow a response that be 12 time more powerful , reduce the systemic toxic effect . we be work relentlessly to bring this technology to the next level . we be finalize the pre - clinical testing and the animal model require prior to ask the fda for approval for clinical trial .     currently , the majority of patient will die from pancreatic cancer . we be hope that one day , we can reduce their pain , extend their life and potentially make pancreatic cancer a curable disease .     by rethink the way we deliver the drug , we do not only make it more powerful and less toxic , we be also open the door to find new innovative solution for almost all other impossible problem in pancreatic cancer patient and beyond .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   so I know ted be about a lot of thing that be big , but I want to talk to you about something very small . so small , it be a single word . the word be " misfit . " it be one of my favorite word , because it be so literal . I mean , it be a person who sort of miss fitting in . or a person who fit in badly . or this : " a person who be poorly adapt to new situation and environment . " I be a card - carry misfit . and I be here for the other misfit in the room , because I be never the only one . I be go to tell you a misfit story .     somewhere in my early 30 , the dream of become a writer come right to my doorstep . actually , it come to my mailbox in the form of a letter that say I would win a giant literary prize for a short story I have write . the short story be about my life as a competitive swimmer and about my crappy home life , and a little bit about how grief and loss can make you insane . the prize be a trip to new york city to meet big - time editor and agent and other author . so kind of it be the wannabe writer 's dream , right ? you know what I do the day the letter come to my house ? because I be I , I put the letter on my kitchen table , I pour myself a giant glass of vodka with ice and lime , and I sit there in my underwear for an entire day , just stare at the letter . I be think about all the way I would already screw my life up . who the hell be I to go to new york city and pretend to be a writer ? who be I ?     I 'll tell you . I be a misfit . like legion of other child , I come from an abusive household that I narrowly escape with my life . I already have two epically fail marriage underneath my belt . I have flunk out of college not once but twice and maybe even a third time that I be not go to tell you about .     ( laughter )     and I would do an episode of rehab for drug use . and I would have two lovely staycation in jail . so I be on the right stage .     ( laughter )     but the real reason , I think , I be a misfit , be that my daughter die the day she be bear , and I have not figure out how to live with that story yet . after my daughter die I also spend a long time homeless , live under an overpass in a kind of profound state of zombie grief and loss that some of we encounter along the way . you all of we , if you live long enough . you know , homeless people be some of our most heroic misfit , because they start out as we . so you see , I would miss fit in to just about every category out there : daughter , wife , mother , scholar . and the dream of be a writer be really kind of like a small , sad stone in my throat .     it be pretty much in spite of myself that I get on that plane and fly to new york city , where the writer be . fellow misfit , I can almost see your head glow . I can pick you out of a room . at first , you would 've love it . you get to choose the three famous writer you want to meet , and these guy go and find they for you . you got set up at the gramercy park hotel , where you get to drink scotch late in the night with cool , smart , swank people . and you got to pretend you be cool and smart and swank , too . and you got to meet a bunch of editor and author and agent at very , very fancy lunch and dinner . ask I how fancy .     audience : how fancy ?     lidia yuknavitch : I be make a confession : I steal three linen napkin —     ( laughter )     from three different restaurant . and I shove a menu down my pant .     ( laughter )     I just want some keepsake so that when I get home , I could believe it have really happen to I . you know ?     the three writer I want to meet be carole maso , lynne tillman and peggy phelan . these be not famous , good - sell author , but to I , they be woman - writer titan . carole maso write the book that later become my art bible . lynne tillman give I permission to believe that there be a chance my story could be part of the world . and peggy phelan remind I that maybe my brain could be more important than my boob . they be not mainstream woman writer , but they be cut a path through the mainstream with their body story , I like to think , kind of the way water cut the grand canyon .     it nearly kill I with joy to hang out with these three over-50 - year - old woman writer . and the reason it nearly kill I with joy be that I would never know a joy like that . I have never be in a room like that . my mother never go to college . and my creative career to that point be a sort of small , sad , stillborn thing . so kind of in those first night in new york I want to die there . I be just like , " kill I now . I be good . this be beautiful . " some of you in the room will understand what happen next .     first , they take I to the office of farrar , straus and giroux . farrar , straus and giroux be like my mega - dream press . I mean , t.s . eliot and flannery o'connor be publish there . the main editor guy sit I down and talk to I for a long time , try to convince I I have a book in I about my life as a swimmer . you know , like a memoir . the whole time he be talk to I , I sit there smile and nod like a numb idiot , with my arm cross over my chest , while nothing , nothing , nothing come out of my throat . so in the end , he pat I on the shoulder like a swim coach might . and he wish I luck and he give I some free book and he show I out the door .     next , they take I to the office of w.w . norton , where I be pretty sure I would be escort from the building just for wear doc marten . but that do not happen . be at the norton office feel like reach up into the night sky and touch the moon while the star stitch your name across the cosmo . I mean , that be how big a deal it be to I . you get it ? their lead editor , carol houck smith , lean over right in my face with these beady , bright , fierce eye and say , " well , send I something then , immediately ! " see , now most people , especially ted people , would have run to the mailbox , right ? it take I over a decade to even imagine put something in an envelope and lick a stamp .     on the last night , I give a big reading at the national poetry club . and at the end of the reading , katharine kidde of kidde , hoyt & picard literary agency , walk straight up to I and shake my hand and offer I representation , like , on the spot . I stand there and I kind of go deaf . have this ever happen to you ? and I almost start cry because all the people in the room be dress so beautifully , and all that come out of my mouth be : " I do not know . I have to think about it . " and she say , " ok , then , " and walk away . all those open hand out to I , that small , sad stone in my throat ...     you see , I be try to tell you something about people like I . misfit people — we do not always know how to hope or say yes or choose the big thing , even when it be right in front of we . it be a shame we carry . it be the shame of want something good . it be the shame of feel something good . it be the shame of not really believe we deserve to be in the room with the people we admire .     if I could , I would go back and I would coach myself . I would be exactly like those over-50 - year - old woman who help I . I would teach myself how to want thing , how to stand up , how to ask for they . I would say , " you ! yeah , you ! you belong in the room , too . " the radiance fall on all of we , and we be nothing without each other . instead , I fly back to oregon , and as I watch the evergreen and rain come back into view , I just drink many tiny bottle of airplane " feel sorry for yourself . " I think about how , if I be a writer , I be some kind of misfit writer . what I be say be , I fly back to oregon without a book deal , without an agent , and with only a headful and heart - ful of memory of having sit so near the beautiful writer . memory be the only prize I allow myself .     and yet , at home in the dark , back in my underwear , I could still hear their voice . they say , " do not listen to anyone who try to get you to shut up or change your story . " they say , " give voice to the story only you know how to tell . " they say , " sometimes tell the story be the thing that save your life . "     now I be , as you can see , the woman over 50 . and I be a writer . and I be a mother . and I become a teacher . guess who my favorite student be . although it do not happen the day that dream letter come through my mailbox , I do write a memoir , call " the chronology of water . " in it be the story of how many time I 've have to reinvent a self from the ruin of my choice , the story of how my seem failure be really just weird - ass portal to something beautiful . all I have to do be give voice to the story .     there be a myth in most culture about follow your dream . it be call the hero 's journey . but I prefer a different myth , that be slightly to the side of that or underneath it . it be call the misfit 's myth . and it go like this : even at the moment of your failure , right then , you be beautiful . you do not know it yet , but you have the ability to reinvent yourself endlessly . that be your beauty .     you can be a drunk , you can be a survivor of abuse , you can be an ex - con , you can be a homeless person , you can lose all your money or your job or your husband or your wife , or the bad thing of all , a child . you can even lose your marble . you can be stand dead center in the middle of your failure and still , I be only here to tell you , you be so beautiful . your story deserve to be hear , because you , you rare and phenomenal misfit , you new specie , be the only one in the room who can tell the story the way only you would . and I would be listen .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   ok , first , some introduction . my mom , jennie , take this picture . that be my dad , frank , in the middle . and on his left , my sister : mary catherine , judith ann , theresa marie . john patrick 's sit on his lap and kevin michael 's on his right . and in the pale - blue windbreaker , susan diane . I . I love grow up in a big family . and one of my favorite thing be pick name . but by the time child number seven come along , we have nearly run out of middle name . it be a long deliberation before we finally settle on jennifer bridget . every parent in this audience know the joy and excitement of pick a new baby 's name . and I be excited and thrill to help my mom in that special ceremonial moment .     but it be not like that everywhere . I travel a lot and I see a lot . but it take I by surprise to learn in an area of ethiopia , parent delay pick the name for their new baby by a month or more . why delay ? why not take advantage of this special ceremonial time ? well , they delay because they be afraid . they be afraid their baby will die . and this loss might be a little more bearable without a name . a face without a name might help they feel just a little less attach .     so here we be in one part of the world — a time of joy , excitement , dream of the future of that child — while in another world , parent be fill with dread , not dare to dream of a future for their child beyond a few precious week . how can that be ? how can it be that 2.6 million baby die around the world before they be even one month old ? 2.6 million . that be the population of vancouver . and the shocking thing be : why ? in too many case , we simply do not know .     now , I remember recently see an update pie chart . and the pie chart be label , " cause of death in child under five worldwide . " and there be a pretty big section of that pie chart , about 40 percent — 40 percent be label " neonatal . " now , " neonatal " be not a cause of death . neonatal be simply an adjective , an adjective that mean that the child be less than one month old . for I , " neonatal " say : " we have no idea . "     now , I be a scientist . I be a doctor . I want to fix thing . but you can not fix what you can not define . so our first step in restore the dream of those parent be to answer the question : why be baby die ?     so today , I want to talk about a new approach , an approach that I feel will not only help we know why baby be die , but be begin to completely transform the whole field of global health . it be call " precision public health . "     for I , precision medicine come from a very special place . I train as a cancer doctor , an oncologist . I get into it because I want to help people feel well . but too often my treatment make they feel bad . I still remember young woman be drive to my clinic by their mom — adult , who have to be help into my exam room by their mother . they be so weak from the treatment I have give they . but at the time , in those front line in the war on cancer , we have few tool . and the tool we do have could not differentiate between the cancer cell that we want to hit hard and those healthy cell that we want to preserve . and so the side effect that you be all very familiar with — hair loss , be sick to your stomach , have a suppress immune system , so infection be a constant threat — be always surround we .     and then I move to the biotechnology industry . and I get to work on a new approach for breast cancer patient that could do a well job of tell the healthy cell from the unhealthy or cancer cell . it be a drug call herceptin . and what herceptin allow we to do be to precisely target her2 - positive breast cancer , at the time , the scary form of breast cancer . and that precision let we hit hard the cancer cell , while spare and be more gentle on the normal cell . a huge breakthrough . it feel like a miracle , so much so that today , we be harness all those tool — big datum , consumer monitoring , gene sequence and more — to tackle a broad variety of disease . that be allow we to target individual with the right remedy at the right time .     precision medicine revolutionize cancer therapy . everything change . and I want everything to change again . so I 've be ask myself : why should we limit this smart , more precise , well way to tackle disease to the rich world ? now , do not misunderstand I — I be not talk about bring expensive medicine like herceptin to the develop world , although I would actually kind of like that . what I be talk about be move from this precise target for individual to tackle public health problem in population .     now , ok , I know probably you be think , " she be crazy . you can not do that . that be too ambitious . " but here be the thing : we be already do this in a limited way , and it be already start to make a big difference .     so here be what be happen . now , I tell you I train as a cancer doctor . but like many , many doctor who train in san francisco in the ' 80 , I also train as an aids doctor . it be a terrible time . aids be a death sentence . all my patient die . now , thing be well , but hiv / aids remain a terrible global challenge . worldwide , about 17 million woman be live with hiv . we know that when these woman become pregnant , they can transfer the virus to their baby . we also know in the absence of therapy , half those baby will not survive until the age of two . but we know that antiretroviral therapy can virtually guarantee that she will not transmit the virus to the baby . so what do we do ?     well , a one - size - fit - all approach , kind of like that blast of chemo , would mean we test and treat every pregnant woman in the world . that would do the job . but it be just not practical . so instead , we target those area where hiv rate be the high . we know in certain country in sub - saharan africa we can test and treat pregnant woman where rate be high . this precision approach to a public health problem have cut by nearly half hiv transmission from mother to baby in the last five year .     ( applause )     screen pregnant woman in certain area in the develop world be a powerful example of how precision public health can change thing on a big scale .     so ... how do we do that ? we can do that because we know . we know who to target , what to target , where to target and how to target . and that , for I , be the important   element of precision public health : who , what , where and how .     but let us go back to the 2.6 million baby who die before they be one month old . here be the problem : we just do not know . it may seem unbelievable , but the way we figure out the cause of infant mortality in those country with the high infant mortality be a conversation with mom . a health worker ask a mom who have just lose her child , " be the baby vomiting ? do they have a fever ? " and that conversation may take place as long as three month after the baby have die . now , put yourself in the shoe of that mom . it be a heartbreaking , excruciating conversation . and even bad — it be not that helpful , because we might know there be a fever or vomiting , but we do not know why . so in the absence of know that knowledge , we can not prevent that mom , that family , or other family in that community from suffer the same tragedy .     but what if we apply a precision public health approach ? let us say , for example , we find out in certain area of africa that baby be die because of a bacterial infection transfer from the mother to the baby , know as group b streptococcus . in the absence of treatment , mom have a seven time high chance that her next baby will die . once we define the problem , we can prevent that death with something as cheap and safe as penicillin . we can do that because then we 'll know . and that be the point : once we know , we can bring the right intervention to the right population in the right place to save life .     with this approach , and with these intervention and other like they , I have no doubt that a precision public health approach can help our world achieve our 15 - year goal . and that would translate into a million baby ' life save every single year . one million baby every single year .     and why would we stop there ? a much more powerful approach to public health — imagine what might be possible . why could not we more effectively tackle malnutrition ? why would not we prevent cervical cancer in woman ? and why not eradicate malaria ?     ( applause )     yes , clap for that !     ( applause )     so , you know , I live in two different world , one world populate by scientist , and another world populate by public health professional . the promise of precision public health be to bring these two world together . but you know , we all live in two world : the rich world and the poor world . and what I be most excited about about precision public health be bridge these two world . every day in the rich world , we be bring incredible talent and tool — everything at our disposal — to precisely target disease in way I never imagine would be possible . surely , we can tap into that kind of talent and tool to stop baby die in the poor world . if we do , then every parent would have the confidence to name their child the moment that child be bear , dare to dream that that child 's life will be measure in decade , not day .     thank you .     ( applause )  
have you ever be ask by your chinese friend , " what be your zodiac sign ? " do not think they be make small talk . if you say , " I be a monkey , " they immediately know you be either 24 , 36 , 48 or 60 year old .     ( laughter ) ask a zodiac sign be a polite way of ask your age .     by reveal your zodiac sign , you be also be evaluate . judgment be be make about your fortune or misfortune , your personality , career prospect and how you will do in a give year . if you share you and your partner 's animal sign , they will paint a picture in their mind about your private life . maybe you do not believe in the chinese zodiac . as a quarter of the world population be influence by it , you would be wise to do something about that .     so what be the chinese zodiac , exactly ? most westerner think of greco - roman zodiac , the sign divide into 12 month . the chinese zodiac be different . it be a 12 - year cycle label with animal , start with a rat and end with a pig , and have no association with constellation . for example , if you be bear in 1975 , you be a rabbit . can you see your zodiac sign there ? our chinese ancestor construct a very complicated theoretical framework base on yin and yang , the five element and the 12 zodiac animal . over thousand of year , this popular culture have affect people 's major decision , such as name , marriage , give birth and attitude towards each other . and some of the implication be quite amazing .     the chinese believe certain animal get on well than the other . so parent choose specific year to give birth to baby , because they believe the team effort by the right combination of animal can give prosperity to family . we even refer to the zodiac when enter into romantic relation . I be a pig ; I should have perfect romance with tiger , goat and rabbit . chinese people believe some animal be natural enemy . as a pig , I need to be careful with a snake . raise your hand if you be a snake . let us have a chat later .     ( laughter )     we believe some animal be lucky than the other , such as the dragon . unlike the western tradition , the chinese dragon be a symbol for power , strength and wealth . it be everyone 's dream to have a dragon baby . jack ma 's parent must have be very proud . and they be not the only one . in 2012 , the year of the dragon , the birthrate in china , hong kong and taiwan increase by five percent . that mean another one million more baby . with a traditional preference to baby boy , the boy - girl ratio that year be 120 to 100 . when those dragon boy grow up , they will face much more severe competition in love and job market .     accord to the bbc and the chinese government 's press release , january 2015 see a peak of cesarean section . why ? that be the last month for the year of the horse . it be not because they like horse so much , it be because they try to avoid have unlucky goat baby .     ( laughter )     if you be a goat , please do not feel bad . those be goat baby . they do not look like loser to I .     ( laughter )     tiger be another undesirable animal , due to its volatile temperament . many chinese region see a sharp decline of birthrate during those year . perhaps one should consider zodiac in reverse , as those tiger and goat baby will face much less competition . maybe they be the lucky one . I go through the forbe top 300 rich people in the world , and it be interesting to see the most undesirable two animal , the goat and tiger , be at the top of the chart , even high than the dragon . so maybe we should consider , maybe it be much well to have less competition .     one last but interesting point : many chinese people make their investment decision base on the zodiac sign index . although the belief and tradition of the zodiac sign have be over thousand of year , the trend of use it in make major decision do not really happen until the past few decade . our ancestor be very busy survive poverty , drought , famine , riot , disease and civil war . and finally , chinese people have the time , wealth and technology to create an ideal life they 've always want . the collective decision make by 1.3 billion people have cause the fluctuation in economic and demand on everything , from health care and education to property and consumer good . as china play such an important role in the global economy and geopolitic , the decision make base on the zodiac and other chinese tradition end up impact everyone around the world .     be there any monkey here ? 2016 be the year of the monkey . monkey be clever , curious , creative and mischievous .     thank you .     ( applause )
   I be an iranian - american muslim female , like all of you . and I be also a social justice comedian , something that I insist be an actual job .     to explain what that be , let I tell you how I get here . I 've perform all over the country . and let I tell you , america be majestic , right ? it be get breathtake nature , waffle house and diabete as far as the eye can see . it be really something .     now , the american population can be break up into three main category : there be mostly wonderful people , hater and florida .     ( laughter )     besides florida , the most troubling category here be the hater . they be a minority , but they overcompensate by be extra loud . they have the napoleon complex of demographic , and yes , some of the man do wear heel .     as a social justice comedian , it be my goal to convert these hater , because they hate a lot of thing , which lead to negative outcome , like racism , violence and ted nugent . this be not an exhaustive list ; I be probably miss 3 - 7 item .     but the point be , we have to reckon with the hater . but there be variance within this group and it be not efficient to go after all of they , right ? so what I 've do be create a highly scientific taxonomy of hater . I basically take all of the hater , I put they in a petri dish , like a scientist , and this be what I find .     ( laughter )     first off , we have the troll . these be your garden - variety digital hater . they be the people who quit their job so they can post on youtube video all day long . there be also the drive - by hater . now , these people will be at a stoplight , they 'll wait for the light to turn green and when it do , they yell , " go back to your own country ! " now back in the day , they would 've actually get out of their car and hate you to your face . but they just do not make they like they use to — which be another sign of the decline in america .     ( laughter )     the next category be the mission - orient - bigot- whose - group - affiliation- give - they - cover - for - hate hater . these guy like to hate via a seemingly nice organization , like a church or a nonprofit , and they oftentime like to speak in an old - timey voice .     but the group I be most interested in be the swing hater . the swing hater be sister to the swing voter — they just can not decide ! they be like ideological slut who move from hate to not hate . and they do it because they do not have enough information . this be the group I like to target with social justice comedy . why comedy ? because on a scale of comedy to brochure , the average american prefer comedy , as you can see from this graph .     ( laughter )     comedy be very popular . and by the way , this be a mathematically accurate graph , generate from fake number .     ( laughter )     now , the question be : why do social justice comedy work ? because , first off , it make you laugh . and when you be laugh , you enter into a state of openness . and in that moment of openness , a good social justice comedian can stick in a whole bunch of information , and if they be really skilled , a rectal exam .     ( laughter )     here be some ground rule for social justice comedy : first off , it be not partisan . this be not political comedy , this be about justice , and no one be against justice . two , it be invite and warm , it make you feel like you be sit inside of a burrito . three , it be funny but sneaky , like you could be hear an interesting treatise on income inequality , that be encase in a really sophisticated poop joke .     ( laughter )     here be how I see social justice comedy work . a few year ago , I round up a bunch of muslim - american comedian — in a non - violent way —     ( laughter )     and we go around the country to place like alabama , arizona , tennessee , georgia — place where they love the muzzie — and we do stand - up show . we call the tour " the muslims be come ! "     ( laughter )     we turn this into a movie , and then after the movie come out , a know hate group spend 300,000 dollar on an anti - muslim poster campaign with the mta — that be the new york city subway system . now , the poster be truly offensive , not to mention poorly design — I mean , if you be go to be bigote , you might as well use a well font .     ( laughter )     but we decide , why not launch our own poster campaign that say nice thing about muslim , while promote the movie . so myself and fellow comedian dean obeidallah decide to launch the fighting - bigotry- with - delightful - poster campaign . we raise the money , work with the mta for over 5 month , get the poster approve , and two day after they be suppose to go up , the mta decide to ban the poster , cite political content .     let us take a look at a couple of those poster . here be one . fact about muslims : muslims invent the concept of a hospital . ok . fact : grow - up muslim can do more push - up than baby muslims .     ( laughter )     fact : muslims invent justin timberlake .     ( laughter )     let us take a look at another one . the ugly truth about muslim : they have great frittata recipe .     now clearly , frittata be consider political by the mta . either that , or the mere mention of muslims in a positive light be consider political — but it be not . it be about justice . so we decide to change our fighting - bigortry- with - delightful - poster campaign and turn it into the fighting - bigotry- with - a - delightful - lawsuit campaign .     ( laughter )     so basically , what I be say be a couple of dirt - bag comedian take on a major new york city agency and the comedian win .     ( applause and cheer )     thank you . victory be a very weird feeling . I be like , " be this what blonde girl feel like all the time ? 'cause this be amazing ! "     ( laughter )     here be another example . I be ask everywhere I go : " why do not muslims denounce terrorism ? " we do . but ok , I 'll take the bait . so I decide to launch thedailydenouncer.com . it be a website that denounce terrorism every day of the week , while take the weekend off . let us take a look at an example . they generally appear as single - panel cartoon , " I denounce terrorism ! I also denounce people who never fill the paper tray ! " the point of the website be that it denounce terrorism while recognize that it be ridiculous that we have to constantly denounce terrorism .     but if bigotry be not your thing , social justice comedy be useful for all sort of issue . for example , myself and fellow comedian lee camp go to the cayman island to investigate offshore banking . now , the united states lose something like 300 billion dollar a year in these offshore tax haven . not to brag , but at the end of every month , I have something like 5 - 15 dollar in disposable income . so we walk into these bank in the cayman island and ask if we could open up a bank account with eight dollar and 27 cent .     ( laughter )     the bank manager would indulge we for 30 - 45 second before call security . security would come out , brandish their weapon , and then we would squeal with fear and run away , because — and this be the last rule of social justice comedy — sometimes it make you want to take a dump in your pant .     most of my work be mean to be fun . it be mean to generate a connection and laughter . but yes , sometimes I get run off the ground by security . sometimes I get mean tweet and hate mail . sometimes I get voice mail say that if I continue tell my joke , they 'll kill I and they 'll kill my family . and those death threat be definitely not funny .     but despite the occasional danger , I still think that social justice comedy be one of our good weapon . I mean , we 've try a lot of approach to social justice , like war and competitive ice dancing . but still , a lot of thing be still kind of awful . so I think it be time we try and tell a really good poop joke .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   once there be a star . like everything else , she be bear ; grow to be around 30 time the mass of our sun and live for a very long time . exactly how long , people can not really tell . just like everything in life , she reach the end of her regular star day when her heart , the core of her life , exhaust its fuel . but that be no end .     she transform into a supernova , and in the process release a tremendous amount of energy , outshine the rest of the galaxy and emit , in one second , the same amount of energy our sun will release in 10 day . and she evolve into another role in our galaxy .     supernova explosion be very extreme . but the one that emit gamma ray be even more extreme . in the process of become a supernova , the interior of the star collapse under its own weight and it start rotate ever fast , like an ice skater when pull their arm in close to their body . in that way , it start rotate very fast and it increase , powerfully , its magnetic field . the matter around the star be drag around , and some energy from that rotation be transfer to that matter and the magnetic field be increase even far . in that way , our star have extra energy to outshine the rest of the galaxy in brightness and gamma ray emission .     my star , the one in my story , become what be know as a magnetar . and just for your information , the magnetic field of a magnetar be 1,000 trillion time the magnetic field of earth . the most energetic event ever measure by astronomer carry the name gamma - ray burst because we observe they as burst most or explosion , most strongly measure as gamma - ray light . our star , like the one in our story that become a magnetar , be detect as a gamma - ray burst during the most energetic portion of the explosion . yet , even though gamma - ray burst be the strong event ever measure by astronomer , we can not see they with our naked eye . we depend , we rely on other method in order to study this gamma - ray light . we can not see they with our naked eye . we can only see an itty bitty , tiny portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that we call visible light . and beyond that , we rely on other method .     yet as astronomer , we study a wide range of light and we depend on other method to do that . on the screen , it may look like this . you be see a plot . that be a light curve . it be a plot of intensity of light over time . it be a gamma - ray light curve . sighted astronomer depend on this kind of plot in order to interpret how this light intensity change over time . on the left , you will be see the light intensity without a burst , and on the right , you will be see the light intensity with the burst .     early during my career , I could also see this kind of plot . but then , I lose my sight . I completely lose my sight because of extended illness , and with it , I lose the opportunity to see this plot and the opportunity to do my physics . it be a very strong transition for I in many way . and professionally , it leave I without a way to do my science . I long to access and scrutinize this energetic light and figure out the astrophysical cause . I want to experience the spacious wonder , the excitement , the joy produce by the detection of such a titanic celestial event .     I think long and hard about it , when I suddenly realize that all a light curve be , be a table of number convert into a visual plot . so along with my collaborator , we work really hard and we translate the number into sound . I achieve access to the datum , and today I be able to do physics at the level of the good astronomer , use sound . and what people have be able to do , mainly visually , for hundred of year , now I do it use sound .     ( applause ) listen to this gamma - ray burst that you be see on the — ( applause continue )     thank you .     listen to this burst that you be see on the screen bring something to the ear beyond the obvious burst . now I be go to play the burst for you . it be not music , it be sound .     ( digital beep sound )     this be scientific datum convert into sound , and it be map in pitch . the process be call sonification .     so listen to this bring something to the ear besides the obvious burst . when I examine the very strong low - frequency region , or bass line — I be zoom into the bass line now . we note resonance characteristic of electrically charge gas like the solar wind . and I want you to hear what I hear . you will hear it as a very fast decrease in volume . and because you be sighted , I be give you a red line indicate what intensity of light be be convert into sound .     ( digital hum and whistle sound )     the ( whistle ) be frog at home , do not pay attention to that .     ( laughter )     ( digital hum and whistle sound )     I think you hear it , right ?     so what we find be that the burst last long enough in order to support wave resonance , which be thing cause by exchange of energy between particle that may have be excite , that depend on the volume . you may remember that I say that the matter around the star be drag around ? it transmit power with frequency and field distribution determine by the dimension . you may remember that we be talk about a super - massive star that become a very strong magnetic field magnetar . if this be the case , then outflow from the exploding star may be associate with this gamma - ray burst .     what do that mean ? that star formation may be a very important part of these supernova explosion . listen to this very gamma - ray burst bring we to the notion that the use of sound as an adjunctive visual display may also support sighted astronomer in the search for more information in the datum . simultaneously , I work on analyze measurement from other telescope , and my experiment demonstrate that when you use sound as an adjunctive visual display , astronomer can find more information in this now more accessible datum set . this ability to transform datum into sound give astronomy a tremendous power of transformation . and the fact that a field that be so visual may be improve in order to include anyone with interest in understand what lie in the heavens be a spirit - lifter .     when I lose my sight , I notice that I do not have access to the same amount and quality of information a sighted astronomer have . it be not until we innovate with the sonification process that I regain the hope to be a productive member of the field that I have work so hard to be part of .     yet , information access be not the only area in astronomy where this be important . the situation be systemic and scientific field be not keep up . the body be something changeable — anyone may develop a disability at any point . let us think about , for example , scientist that be already at the top of their career . what happen to they if they develop a disability ? will they feel excommunicate as I do ? information access empower we to flourish . it give we equal opportunity to display our talent and choose what we want to do with our life , base on interest and not base on potential barrier . when we give people the opportunity to succeed without limit , that will lead to personal fulfillment and prospering life . and I think that the use of sound in astronomy be help we to achieve that and to contribute to science .     while other country tell I that the study of perception technique in order to study astronomy datum be not relevant to astronomy because there be no blind astronomer in the field , south africa say , " we want people with disability to contribute to the field . " right now , I be work at the south african astronomical observatory , at the office of astronomy for development . there , we be work on sonification technique and analysis method to impact the student of the athlone school for the blind . these student will be learn radio astronomy , and they will be learn the sonification method in order to study astronomical event like huge ejection of energy from the sun , know as coronal mass ejection . what we learn with these student — these student have multiple disability and cope strategy that will be accommodate — what we learn with these student will directly impact the way thing be be do at the professional level . I humbly call this development . and this be happen right now .     I think that science be for everyone . it belong to the people , and it have to be available to everyone , because we be all natural explorer . I think that if we limit people with disability from participate in science , we 'll sever our link with history and with society . I dream of a level scientific playing field , where people encourage respect and respect each other , where people exchange strategy and discover together . if people with disability be allow into the scientific field , an explosion , a huge titanic burst of knowledge will take place , I be sure .     ( digital beep sound )     that be the titanic burst .     thank you .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   there be thing we say when we catch the eye of a stranger or a neighbor walk by . we say , " hello , how be you ? it be a beautiful day . how do you feel ? " these sound kind of meaningless , right ? and , in some way , they be . they have no semantic meaning . it do not matter how you be or what the day be like . they have something else . they have social meaning . what we mean when we say those thing be : I see you there .     I be obsess with talk to stranger . I make eye contact , say hello , I offer help , I listen . I get all kind of story . about seven year ago , I start document my experience to try to figure out why . what I find be that something really beautiful be go on . this be almost poetic . these be really profound experience . they be unexpected pleasure . they be genuine emotional connection . they be liberate moment .     so one day , I be stand on a corner wait for the light to change , which , I be a new yorker , so that mean I be actually stand in the street on the storm drain , as if that could get I across fast . and there be an old man stand next to I . so he be wear , like , a long overcoat and sort of an old - man hat , and he look like somebody from a movie . and he say to I , " do not stand there . you might disappear . " so this be absurd , right ? but I do what he say . I step back onto the sidewalk . and he smile , and he say , " good . you never know . I might have turn around , and zoop , you be go . "     this be weird , and also really wonderful . he be so warm , and he be so happy that he would save I . we have this little bond . for a minute , I feel like my existence as a person have be notice , and I be worth save . the really sad thing be , in many part of the world , we be raise to believe that stranger be dangerous by default , that we can not trust they , that they might hurt we . but most stranger be not dangerous . we be uneasy around they because we have no context . we do not know what their intention be . so instead of use our perception and make choice , we rely on this category of " strange . "     I have a four - year - old . when I say hello to people on the street , she ask I why . she say , " do we know they ? "     I say , " no , they be our neighbor . "     " be they our friend ? "     " no , it be just good to be friendly . "     I think twice every time I say that to she , because I mean it , but as a woman , particularly , I know that not every stranger on the street have the good intention . it be good to be friendly , and it be good to learn when not to be , but none of that mean we have to be afraid .     there be two huge benefit to use our sense instead of our fear . the first one be that it liberate we . when you think about it , use perception instead of category be much easy say than do . category be something our brain use . when it come to people , it be sort of a shortcut for learn about they . we see male , female , young , old , black , brown , white , stranger , friend , and we use the information in that box . it be quick , it be easy and it be a road to bias . and it mean we be not think about people as individual . I know an american researcher who travel frequently in central asia and africa , alone . she be enter into town and city as a complete stranger . she have no bond , no connection . she be a foreigner . her survival strategy be this : get one stranger to see you as a real , individual person . if you can do that , it 'll help other people see you that way , too .     the second benefit of use our sense have to do with intimacy . I know it sound a little counterintuitive , intimacy and stranger , but these quick interaction can lead to a feeling that sociologist call " fleeting intimacy . " so , it be a brief experience that have emotional resonance and meaning . it be the good feeling I get from be save from the death trap of the storm drain by the old man , or how I feel like part of a community when I talk to somebody on my train on the way to work .     sometimes it go far . researcher have find that people often feel more comfortable be honest and open about their inner self with stranger than they do with their friend and their family — that they often feel more understand by stranger . this gets report in the medium with great lament . " stranger communicate well than spouse ! " it be a good headline , right ? I think it entirely miss the point . the important thing about these study be just how significant these interaction can be ; how this special form of closeness give we something we need as much as we need our friend and our family .     so how be it possible that we communicate so well with stranger ? there be two reason . the first one be that it be a quick interaction . it have no consequence . it be easy to be honest with someone you be never go to see again , right ? that make sense . the second reason be where it get more interesting . we have a bias when it come to people we be close to . we expect they to understand we . we assume they do , and we expect they to read our mind . so imagine you be at a party , and you can not believe that your friend or your spouse be not pick up on it that you want to leave early . and you be think , " I give you the look . "     with a stranger , we have to start from scratch . we tell the whole story , we explain who the people be , how we feel about they ; we spell out all the inside joke . and guess what ? sometimes they do understand we a little well .     ok . so now that we know that talk to stranger matter , how do it work ? there be unwritten rule we tend to follow . the rule be very different depend on what country you be in , what culture you be in . in most part of the us , the baseline expectation in public be that we maintain a balance between civility and privacy . this be know as civil inattention . so , imagine two people be walk towards each other on the street . they 'll glance at each other from a distance . that be the civility , the acknowledgment . and then as they get close , they 'll look away , to give each other some space .     in other culture , people go to extraordinary length not to interact at all . people from denmark tell I that many dane be so averse to talk to stranger , that they would rather miss their stop on the bus than say " excuse I " to someone that they need to get around . instead , there be this elaborate shuffling of bag and use your body to say that you need to get past , instead of use two word .     in egypt , I be tell , it be rude to ignore a stranger , and there be a remarkable culture of hospitality . stranger might ask each other for a sip of water . or , if you ask someone for direction , they be very likely to invite you home for coffee . we see these unwritten rule most clearly when they be break , or when you be in a new place and you be try to figure out what the right thing to do be .     sometimes break the rule a little bit be where the action be . in case it be not clear , I really want you to do this . ok ? so here be how it be go to go . find somebody who be make eye contact . that be a good signal . the first thing be a simple smile . if you be pass somebody on the street or in the hallway here , smile . see what happen .     another be triangulation . there be you , there be a stranger , there be some third thing that you both might see and comment on , like a piece of public art or somebody preach in the street or somebody wear funny clothe . give it a try . make a comment about that third thing , and see if start a conversation .     another be what I call notice . this be usually give a compliment . I be a big fan of notice people 's shoe . I be actually not wear fabulous shoe right now , but shoe be fabulous in general . and they be pretty neutral as far as give compliment go . people always want to tell you thing about their awesome shoe .     you may have already experience the dog and baby principle . it can be awkward to talk to someone on the street ; you do not know how they be go to respond . but you can always talk to their dog or their baby . the dog or the baby be a social conduit to the person , and you can tell by how they respond whether they be open to talk more .     the last one I want to challenge you to be disclosure . this be a very vulnerable thing to do , and it can be very rewarding . so next time you be talk to a stranger and you feel comfortable , tell they something true about yourself , something really personal . you might have that experience I talk about of feel understand .     sometimes in conversation , it come up , people ask I , " what do your dad do ? " or , " where do he live ? " and sometimes I tell they the whole truth , which be that he die when I be a kid . always in those moment , they share their own experience of loss . we tend to meet disclosure with disclosure , even with stranger .     so , here it be . when you talk to stranger , you be make beautiful interruption into the expected narrative of your daily life and their . you be make unexpected connection . if you do not talk to stranger , you be miss out on all of that . we spend a lot of time teach our child about stranger . what would happen if we spend more time teach ourselves ? we could reject all the idea that make we so suspicious of each other . we could make a space for change .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be a journalist , so I like to look for the untold story , the life that quietly play out under the scream of headline . I 've also be go about the business of put down root , choose a partner , make baby . so for the last few year , I 've be try to understand what constitute the 21st - century good life , both because I be fascinate by the moral and philosophical implication , but also because I be in desperate need of answer myself .     we live in tenuous time . in fact , for the first time in american history , the majority of parent do not think that their kid will be well off than they be . this be true of rich and poor , man and woman . now , some of you might hear this and feel sad . after all , america be deeply invest in this idea of economic transcendence , that every generation kind of leapfrog the one before it , earn more , buy more , be more . we 've export this dream all over the world , so kid in brazil and china and even kenya inherit our insatiable expectation for more . but when I read this historic poll for the first time , it do not actually make I feel sad . it feel like a provocation . " well off " — base on whose standard ?     be " well off " find a secure job that you can count on for the rest of your life ? those be nearly extinct . people move job , on average , every 4.7 year , and it be estimate that by 2020 , nearly half of americans will be freelancer . ok , so be well off just a number ? be it about earn as much as you possibly can ? by that singular measurement , we be fail . median per capita income have be flat since about 2000 , adjust for inflation . all right , so be well off get a big house with a white picket fence ? less of we be do that . nearly five million people lose their home in the great recession , and even more of we sober up about the length we be willing to go — or be trick into go , in many predatory case — to hold that deed . home - ownership rate be at their low since 1995 .     all right , so we be not find steady employment , we be not earn as much money , and we be not live in big fancy house . toll the funeral bell for everything that make america great . but , be those the good measurement of a country 's greatness , of a life well live ? what I think make america great be its spirit of reinvention . in the wake of the great recession , more and more americans be redefine what " well off " really mean . turn out , it have more to do with community and creativity than dollar and cent .     now , let I be very clear : the 14.8 percent of americans live in poverty need money , plain and simple . and all of we need policy that protect we from exploitation by employer and financial institution . nothing that follow be mean to suggest that the gap between rich and poor be anything but profoundly immoral . but , too often we let the conversation stop there . we talk about poverty as if it be a monolithic experience ; about the poor as if they be solely victim . part of what I 've learn in my research and reporting be that the art of living well be often practice most masterfully by the most vulnerable .     now , if necessity be the mother of invention , I 've come to believe that recession can be the father of consciousness . it confront we with profound question , question we might be too lazy or distract to ask in time of relative comfort . how should we work ? how should we live ? all of we , whether we realize it or not , seek answer to these question , with our ancestor kind of whispering in our ear .     my great - grandfather be a drunk in detroit , who sometimes manage to hold down a factory job . he have , as unbelievable as it might sound , 21 child , with one woman , my great - grandmother , who die at 47 year old of ovarian cancer . now , I be pregnant with my second child , and I can not even fathom what she must have go through . and if you be try to do the math — there be six set of twin . so my grandfather , their son , become a travel salesman , and he live boom and bust . so my dad grow up answer the door for debt collector and pretend his parent be not home . he actually take his brace off himself with plier in the garage , when his father admit he do not have money to go back to the orthodontist . so my dad , unsurprisingly , become a bankruptcy lawyer . could not write this in a novel , right ? he be obsess with provide a secure foundation for my brother and i.     so I ask these question by way of a few generation of struggle . my parent make sure that I grow up on a kind of steady ground that allow one to question and risk and leap . and ironically , and probably sometimes to their frustration , it be their steadfast commitment to security that allow I to question its value , or at least its value as we 've historically define it in the 21st century .     so let us dig into this first question : how should we work ? we should work like our mother . that be right — we 've spend decade try to fit woman into a work world build for company man . and many have do backbend to fit in , but other have carve a more unconventional path , create a patchwork of meaning and money with enough flexibility to do what they need to do for those that they love . my mom call it " just make it work . " today I hear life coach call it " a portfolio career . " whatever you call it , more and more man be crave these whole , if not harry , life . they be wake up to their desire and duty to be present father and son .     now , artist ann hamilton have say , " labor be a way of know . " labor be a way of know . in other word , what we work on be what we understand about the world . if this be true , and I think it be , then woman who have disproportionately care for the little one and the sick one and the age one , have disproportionately benefit from the most profound kind of know there be : know the human condition . by prioritize care , man be , in a sense , stake their claim to the full range of human existence .     now , this mean the nine - to - five no long work for anyone . punch clock be become obsolete , as be career ladder . whole industry be be bear and die every day . it be all nonlinear from here . so we need to stop ask kid , " what do you want to be when you grow up ? " and start ask they , " how do you want to be when you grow up ? " their work will constantly change . the common denominator be they . so the more they understand their gift and create crew of ideal collaborator , the well off they will be .     the challenge ahead be to reinvent the social safety net to fit this increasingly fragment economy . we need portable health benefit . we need policy that reflect that everyone deserve to be vulnerable or care for vulnerable other , without become destitute . we need to seriously consider a universal basic income . we need to reinvent labor organizing . the promise of a work world that be structure to actually fit our 21st century value , not some archaic idea about bring home the bacon , be long overdue — just ask your mother .     now , how about the second question : how should we live ? we should live like our immigrant ancestor . when they come to america , they often share apartment , survival tactic , child care — always know how to fill one more belly , no matter how small the food available . but they be tell that success mean leave the village behind and pursue that iconic symbol of the american dream , the white picket fence . and even today , we see a white picket fence and we think success , self - possession . but when you strip away the sentimentality , what it really do be divide we . many americans be reject the white picket fence and the kind of highly privatized life that happen within it , and reclaim village life , reclaim interdependence instead .     fifty million of we , for example , live in intergenerational household . this number explode with the great recession , but it turn out people actually like live this way . two - third of those who be live with multiple generation under one roof say it be improve their relationship . some people be choose to share home not with family , but with other people who understand the health and economic benefit of daily community . coabode , an online platform for single mom look to share home with other single mom , have 50,000 user . and people over 65 be especially prone to be look for these alternative live arrangement . they understand that their quality of life depend on a mix of solitude and solidarity . which be true of all of we when you think about it , young and old alike . for too long , we 've pretend that happiness be a king in his castle . but all the research prove otherwise . it show that the healthiest , happy and even safest — in term of both climate change disaster , in term of crime , all of that — be americans who live life intertwine with their neighbor .     now , I 've experience this firsthand . for the last few year , I 've be live in a cohouse community . it be 1.5 acre of persimmon tree , this prolific blackberry bush that snake around a community garden , all smack - dab , by the way , in the middle of urban oakland . the nine unit be all build to be different , different size , different shape , but they be mean to be as green as possible . so big , shiny black solar cell on our roof mean our electricity bill rarely exceed more than five buck in a month . the 25 of we who live there be all different age and political persuasion and profession , and we live in home that have everything a typical home would have . but additionally , we share an industrial - sized kitchen and eat area , where we have common meal twice a week .     now , people , when I tell they I live like this , often have one of two extreme reaction . either they say , " why do not everyone live like this ? " or they say , " that sound totally horrifying . I would never want to do that . " so let I reassure you : there be a sacred respect for privacy among we , but also a commitment to what we call " radical hospitality " — not the kind advertise by the four season , but the kind that say that every single person be worthy of kindness , full stop , end of sentence .     the big surprise for I of live in a community like this ? you share all the domestic labor — the repairing , the cooking , the weeding — but you also share the emotional labor . rather than depend only on the idealize family unit to get all of your emotional need meet , you have two dozen other people that you can go to to talk about a hard day at work or troubleshoot how to handle an abusive teacher . teenager in our community will often go to an adult that be not their parent to ask for advice . it be what bell hooks call " revolutionary parenting , " this humble acknowledgment that kid be healthy when they have a wide range of adult to emulate and count on . turn out , adult be healthy , too . it be a lot of pressure , try to be that perfect family behind that white picket fence .     the " new well off , " as I 've come to call it , be less about invest in the perfect family and more about invest in the imperfect village , whether that be relative live under one roof , a cohouse community like mine , or just a bunch of neighbor who pledge to really know and look out for one another . it be good common sense , right ? and yet , money have often make we dumb about reach out . the most reliable wealth be find in relationship .     the new well off be not an individual prospect at all . in fact , if you be a failure or you think you be a failure , I 've get some good news for you : you might be a success by standard you have not yet honor . maybe you be a mediocre earner but a masterful father . maybe you can not afford your dream home , but you throw legendary neighborhood party . if you be a textbook success , the implication of what I be say could be more grim for you . you might be a failure by standard you hold dear but that the world do not reward . only you can know .     I know that I be not a tribute to my great - grandmother , who live such a short and brutish life , if I earn enough money to afford every creature comfort . you can not buy your way out of suffering or into meaning . there be no home big enough to erase the pain that she must have endure . I be a tribute to she if I live a life as connect and courageous as possible . in the midst of such widespread uncertainty , we may , in fact , be insecure . but we can let that insecurity make we brittle or supple . we can turn inward , lose faith in the power of institution to change — even lose faith in ourselves . or we can turn outward , cultivate faith in our ability to reach out , to connect , to create .     turn out , the big danger be not fail to achieve the american dream . the big danger be achieve a dream that you do not actually believe in . so do not do that . do the hard , more interesting thing , which be to compose a life where what you do every single day , the people you give your good love and ingenuity and energy to , align as closely as possible with what you believe . that , not something as mundane as make money , be a tribute to your ancestor . that be the beautiful struggle .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   as an archaeologist , I be most often ask what my favorite discovery be . the answer 's easy : my husband , greg .     ( laughter )     we meet in egypt on my first dig . it be my first lesson in find unexpected , wonderful thing . this begin an incredible archaeological partnership . year later , I propose to he in front of our favorite pair statue of the prince and princess rahotep and nofret , in the cairo museum , date to 4,600 year ago .     I think if I be go to ask greg to spend the rest of this life with I , then I should ask he in front of two people who have pledge to be together for eternity . these symbol endure because when we look at they , we be look at mirror . they be powerful reminder that our common humanity have not change .     the thrill of archaeological discovery be as powerful as love , because ancient history be the most seductive mistress imaginable . many archaeologist have devote their life to unravel the mystery of the past under hot sun and arctic wind and in dense rainforest . many seek . some discover . all worship at the temple of possibility that one discovery might change history .     on my first day in egypt , I work at a site in the northeast egyptian delta call mende , date to 4,200 year ago , in a cemetery . that be a picture of I — I be just in my bliss . on the dig , surround by emerald green rice paddy , I discover an intact pot . flip it over , I discover a human thumbprint leave by whoever make the vessel . for a moment , time stand still . I do not know where I be . it be because at that moment I realize , when we dig , we be dig for people , not thing .     never be we so present as when we be in the midst of the great past . I can not tell you how many time I 've stand in front of the pyramid of giza , and they leave I speechless . I feel like the lucky person in the world . they be a monument to our human brilliance and everything that be possible . many can not process their brilliance as human — they think alien build they . but this be ridiculous . all you need to do be get up close and personal , and see the hidden hand of man in the chisel mark leave by the tool that build they . the great pyramid of giza be build one stone at a time with 2.3 million block , with incredible bureaucratic efficiency . it be not the pyramid that stand the test of time ; it be human ingenuity . that be our share human brilliance . history may be cyclical , but we be singular .     I love what I do , because I learn that we have not change . I get to read about mother - in - law joke from mesopotamia from 3,500 year ago .     ( laughter )     I get to hear about neighbor curse each other from 4,600 year ago in egypt . and my absolute favorite , from 3,300 year ago in luxor : an inscription that describe schoolboy who cut class to go drink .     ( laughter )     kid these day .     ( laughter )     I get to see the most incredible architecture , see stunning sculpture — I mean , this be basically a selfie in stone — and see that we 've always rock serious bling . and also , we 've be post on wall and obsess about cat —     ( laughter )     for thousand of year .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     archaeologist be the cultural memory preserver and the spokespeople for the billion of people and the thousand of culture that come before we .     good science , imagination and a leap of faith be the trifecta we use to raise the dead . in the last year , archaeologist have make incredible discovery , include : new human ancestor from south africa ; tool from 3.3 million year ago — these be the old tool ever discover — in kenya . and this , from a series of medical implement find from blackbeard 's ship from 1718 . what you be look at be a medical tool use to treat syphili . ouch !     ( laughter )     for each of these , there be thousand of other incredibly important discovery make by my colleague , that do not make headline . however , I believe that the most important thing we do as archaeologist be acknowledge that past people exist and live live worth learn about . can you even imagine what the world would be like today if we acknowledge all human being in this way ?     so , on a dig , we have a challenge : it often look like this . you can not see anything . where be we go to start dig ? this be from a site south of cairo . let us have a look from space . again , you can not really see much . what you be look at be a worldview-3 satellite image , which have a .3 meter resolution . that be 10 inch . this mean that you can zoom in from 400 mile in space and see your tablet . how do I know about this ? it be because I be a space archaeologist . let I repeat that . I be a space archaeologist . this mean —     ( applause )     thank you .     this mean I use satellite image and process they use algorithm , and look at subtle difference in the light spectrum that indicate bury thing under the ground that I get to go excavate and survey . by the way — nasa have a space archaeology program , so it be a real job .     ( laughter )     so , let us have a look again . we be back at the site just south of cairo . you can not see anything . keep your eye on the red rectangle . when we process the image use algorithm — think like a space - base cat scan — this be what you see . this rectilinear form be an ancient tomb that be previously unknown and unexcavated , and you all be the first people to see it in thousand of year .     ( applause )     I believe we have barely scratch the surface in term of what be leave to discover . in the egyptian delta alone , we 've excavate less than one-1000th of one percent of the total volume of egyptian site . when you add to that the thousand of other site my team and I have discover , what we think we know pale in comparison to what we have leave to discover . when you look at the incredible work that my colleague be do all around the world and what they be find , I believe that there be million of undiscovered archaeological site leave to find . discover they will do nothing less than unlock the full potential of our existence .     but we have a challenge . over the last year , we 've see horrible headline of incredible destruction go on to archaeological site , and massive looting by people like isil . isil have destroy temple at palmyra . who blow up a temple ? they 've destroy the tomb of jonah . and we 've see loot at site so rampant , it look like crater of the moon . know isil 's desire to destroy modern human life , it be a natural extension for they to destroy cultural identity as well . countless invade army have do the same throughout history .     we know that isil be profit from the looting of site , but we do not know the scale . this mean that any object purchase on the market today from the middle east could potentially be fund terrorism . when a site be loot , it be as if a puzzle already miss 90 percent of it piece have have the rest obscure beyond recognition . this be ancient identity theft writ large . we know that there be two kind of looting go on : loot by criminal element like isil , and then more local looting by those that be desperate for money . we would all do the same to feed our family ; I do not blame the local looter . I blame the middleman , the unethical trafficker and an international art market that exploit often ambiguous or even completely nonexistent law .     we know loot be go on on a global scale and it be increase , but presently we do not have any tool to stop it . this be begin to change . my team and I have just complete a study look at loot in egypt . we look at open - source datum and map the entirety of loot across egypt from 2002 to 2013 . we find evidence of looting and site destruction at 267 site , and map over 200,000 loot pit . it be astonishing . and put that datum together — you can see the loot pit mark here . at one site , the looting get bad from 2009 , 2011 , 2012 — hundred and hundred of pit .     put all the data together , what we find be that , contrary to popular opinion , looting do not start to get bad in egypt in 2011 after the arab spring , but in 2009 , after the global recession . thus , we 've show with big datum that looting be fundamentally an economic issue . if we do nothing to stop the problem , all of egypt 's site will be affect by loot by 2040 . thus , we be at a tipping point . we be the generation with all the tool and all the technology to stop loot , but we be not work fast enough .     sometimes an archaeological site can surprise you with its resilience . I be just back from the field , where I co - lead a joint mission with egypt 's ministry of antiquity at a site call lisht . this site date to the middle kingdom of egypt between 2,000 and 1,750 bc . the middle kingdom be ancient egypt 's renaissance period . after a time of intense internal strife and environmental challenge , egypt rebound with an incredible resurgence of art , architecture and literature . it be a favorite period of time to study in egypt , because it teach we so much about how we can survive and thrive after great disaster .     now at this site , we have already map countless loot pit . lisht be a royal site ; there would have be thousand of people bury there who live and work at the court of pharaoh . you can see this before and after ; you see dozen of loot pit . north lisht . this be in south lisht , before and after . when we first visit the site , we could see the tomb of many high - rank official that have be loot . let I put into perspective for you what be take . imagine a two meter by two meter area full of coffin , jewelry and incredible statuary . multiply that time over a thousand . that be what be take .     so , when we start work , my egyptian co - director , mohamed youssef , approach I and say , " we must work at this one particular tomb . it be be attack by looter . if we do not do anything , they 'll be back . " of course I agree , but I do not think we would find anything . I think the looter have steal everything . what we start to find be the most incredible relief . look at this painting — it be just stunning . we start find engrave inscription . and even the title of the tomb owner — he have title like , " overseer of the army , " " overseer of the treasury . " I begin to have hope . maybe , just maybe we would find his name . for the ancient egyptian , have their name last for eternity be their goal . and then one day , this appear . this be the name of the tomb owner : intef . you can see it write out here , in hieroglyph . work together with my egyptian team , we have restore someone 's name from 3,900 year ago .     ( applause )     work together with my egyptian colleague , we celebrate this moment of share discovery . what we be do together be right and true . we find this incredible false door , mostly intact . on it we read about intef and his inscription . you can actually even see he seat here . what I realize be that everything I have assume about loot site have be prove wrong .     every day on site we work together with 70 egyptian as colleague and friend . in the face of so much hatred and ignorance against those in the middle east , every moment on site feel like a protest for peace . when you work with those that do not look like you , or think like you , or speak like you , your share mission of archaeological discovery erase all superficial difference . what I learn this season be that archaeology be not about what you find . it be about what you can prove possible .     sometimes when you travel , you end up find long - lose family — not those with whom you share gene , but a share entry in the book of life . this be omer farrouk , my brother . omer be a gufti from a village just north of luxor , call guft . guftis be part of a celebrated tradition in egyptology . they help with digging and work crew organization . omer be my coo and cfo . I simply could not do work without he . one day many year ago , when I be a young graduate student and omer be a young gufti who could not speak much english , we learn , completely randomly , that we be bear in the same year , the same month and the same day , six hour apart . twins .     ( laughter )     separate by an ocean , but forever connect for ancient egypt be our mother . I know then we would always work together — not in my brain , but in the part of your soul that know not everything can be explain .     ( arabic ) omer by brother , I will always love you .     ( english ) omer my brother , I will always love you .     so , just before my first dig in egypt , my mentor , the very famous egyptologist professor william kelly simpson , call I into his office . he hand I a check for $ 2,000 , and say , " this be to cover your expense . have a glorious adventure this summer . someday you will do this for someone else . " thus , my ted prize wish be partial payback , plus interest —     ( laughter )     for a great human being 's generosity and kindness .     so , my wish . I wish for we to discover the million of unknown archaeological site around the world . by create a 21st - century army of global explorer , we 'll find and protect the world 's hidden heritage , which contain clue to humankind 's collective resilience and creativity .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     so how be we go to do this ? we be go to build with the ted prize money an online , crowdsource , citizen science platform to allow anyone in the world to engage with discover archaeological site . there be only a couple hundred of us space archaeologist around the world . it be my dream to engage the world with help to find site and protect they . what you 'll do be sign in , create a username — note that this particular username be already take .     ( laughter )     you 'll take a tutorial and you 'll start work . I want to note at the outset that in no way will be share gps datum or mapping datum for site . we want to treat they like human patient datum , and not reveal their location . you 'll then be deal a card from a deck — 20 x 20 meter or 30 x 30 meter , and you 'll be look for feature . my team and I will have batch - process large amount of satellite datum use algorithm in order for you to find thing , so you 'll be do really good science .     you 'll then be start to look . what do you see ? do you see a temple ? do you see a tomb ? do you see a pyramid ? do you see any potential site damage or site loot ? you 'll then begin to mark what be there . and off to the side be always go to be rich example of exactly what you be see , to help guide you . all the datum that you help we collect will be share with vet authority , and will help create a new global alarm system to help protect site . but it be not just go to stop there . all the archaeologist with whom we share your discovery will take you with they as they begin to excavate they , by use periscope , google plus and social medium .     a hundred year ago , archaeology be for the rich . fifty year ago , it be for man . now it be primarily for academic . our goal be to democratize the process of archaeological discovery , and allow anyone to participate . ninety - four year ago , howard carter discover the tomb of king tut . who be the next howard carter ? it might be you .     by create this platform , we will find the million of place occupy by the billion of people that come before we . if we want to answer the big question about who we be and where we 've come from , the answer to those question do not lie in pyramid or palace , but in the city and village of those that come before we . if we want to learn about the past , it be time we invert the pyramid . acknowledge that the past be worth save mean so much more . it mean that we be worth save , too . and the great story ever tell be the story of our share human journey . but the only way we be go to be able to write it be if we do it together . come with I .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be hold something remarkably old . it be old than any human artifact , old than life on earth , old than the continent and the ocean between they . this be form over four billion year ago in the early day of the solar system while the planet be still form . this rusty lump of nickel and iron may not appear special , but when it be cut open ... you can see that it be different from earthly metal . this pattern reveal metallic crystal that can only form out in space where molten metal can cool extremely slowly , a few degree every million year . this be once part of a much large object , one of million leave over after the planet form . we call these object asteroid .     asteroid be our old and most numerous cosmic neighbor . this graphic show near - earth asteroid orbit around the sun , show in yellow , and swinge close to the earth 's orbit , show in blue . the size of the earth , sun and asteroid have be greatly exaggerate so you can see they clearly . team of scientist across the globe be search for these object , discover new one every day , steadily map near - earth space . much of this work be fund by nasa . I think of the search for these asteroid as a giant public work project , but instead of build a highway , we be chart outer space , build an archive that will last for generation .     these be the 1,556 near - earth asteroid discover just last year . and these be all of the know near - earth asteroid , which at last count be 13,733 . each one have be image , catalog and have its path around the sun determine . although it vary from asteroid to asteroid , the path of most asteroid can be predict for dozen of year . and the path of some asteroid can be predict with incredible precision . for example , scientist at the jet propulsion laboratory predict where the asteroid toutatis be go to be four year in advance to within 30 kilometer . in those four year , toutatis travel 8.5 billion kilometer . that be a fractional precision of 0.000000004 .     ( laughter )     now , the reason I have this beautiful asteroid fragment be because , like all neighbor , asteroid sometimes drop by unexpectedly .     ( laughter )     three year ago today , a small asteroid explode over the city of chelyabinsk , russia . that object be about 19 meter across , or about as big as a convenience store . object of this size hit the earth every 50 year or so .     66 million year ago , a much large object hit the earth , cause a massive extinction . 75 percent of plant and animal specie be lose , include , sadly , the dinosaur . that object be about 10 kilometer across , and 10 kilometer be roughly the cruise altitude of a 747 jet . so the next time you be in an airplane , snag a window seat , look out and imagine a rock so enormous that rest on the ground , it just graze your wingtip . it be so wide that it take your plane one full minute to fly past it . that be the size of the asteroid that hit the earth .     it have only be within my lifetime that asteroid have be consider a credible threat to our planet . and since then , there be be a focused effort underway to discover and catalog these object . I be lucky enough to be part of this effort . I be part of a team of scientist that use nasa 's neowise telescope . now , neowise be not design to find asteroid . it be design to orbit the earth and look far beyond our solar system to seek out the cold star and the most luminous galaxy . and it do that very well for its design lifetime of seven month . but today , six year later , it be still go . we 've repurpose it to discover and study asteroid . and although it be a wonderful little space robot , these day it be kind of like a use car . the cryogen that use to refrigerate its sensor be long go , so we joke that its air - conditioning be break . it be get 920 million mile on the odometer , but it still run great and reliably take a photograph of the sky every 11 second . it be take 23 photo since I begin speak to you .     one of the reason neowise be so valuable be that it see the sky in the thermal infrare . that mean that instead of see the sunlight that asteroid reflect , neowise see the heat that they emit . this be a vital capability since some asteroid be as dark as coal and can be difficult or impossible to spot with other telescope . but all asteroid , light or dark , shine brightly for neowise .     astronomer be use every technique at their disposal to discover and study asteroid . in 2010 , a historic milestone be reach . the community , together , discover over 90 percent of asteroid big than one kilometer across — object capable of massive destruction to earth . but the job be not do yet . an object 140 meter or big could decimate a medium - sized country . so far , we 've only find 25 percent of those .     we must keep search the sky for near - earth asteroid . we be the only specie able to understand calculus or build telescope . we know how to find these object . this be our responsibility . if we find a hazardous asteroid with significant early warning , we could nudge it out of the way . unlike earthquake , hurricane or volcanic eruption , an asteroid impact can be precisely predict and prevent . what we need to do now be map near - earth space . we must keep search the sky .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   gayle king : have a seat , serena williams , or should we say , have a seat , mom .     ( cheers )     so no doubt , you guy be like I . you see the release of serena in that great yellow bathing suit last week and when I see it , all I could think of be , " gosh , why could not she have wait til we sit onstage for ted ? " I be very selfish , I know . so I ask you about that picture , and you say nobody be suppose to see that picture . what do you mean ?     serena williams : well , actually , it be an accident . I be on vacation , just take some time for myself , and I have this thing where I 've be check my status and take picture every week to see how far along I be go —     gk : and share it with friend , maybe ?     sw : no , actually I have just be save it , and I do not really tell a lot of people , to be quite honest , and I would be save it , and you know how social medium be , you press the wrong button and —     ( laughter )     gk : and there it be .     sw : so 30 minute later — my phone do not ring that much — and 30 minute later , I miss like four call , and I be like , that be weird , and then I pick it up and I be like , oh no . but it be a good moment . I be going to wait literally just five or six more day — that be ok .     gk : I know , because it be weird , serena , because it only say 20 week , so it be not like there be a whole lot of information on it .     sw : exactly , so that be what I 've be do all this time . I 've be just track it . 18 , 19 — every week I would just take a picture and save it , and I 've be so good about it , and this be the one time that I slip .     gk : there you go . well , congratulation .     sw : yes , thank you .     gk : it really be ok . when you hear the news , be you excited ? be you afraid ? be you worried ? that you be pregnant , I mean .     sw : so I hear it two day before the beginning of the australian open , which be one of the big grand slam .     gk : you find out two day before ?     sw : yeah , so it be two day before , and I know . I be nervous . I be not quite sure what to think , but I just know that at that moment it be really important for I to just focus right there at the australian open , and I be definitely not sure what to do . I be like , can I play ? I know it be very dangerous , maybe , sometimes in the first 12 week or so , so I have a lot of question .     gk : but not only do you play , ms . williams , you win .     ( cheers )     sw : yeah . may I just say , 23 grand slam to you .     sw : thank you .     ( applause )     gk : while pregnant !     sw : well , I be look for another handicap , so ... no .     gk : do you play differently that game , know you be pregnant ?     sw : I do . it be not very easy . you hear all these story about people when they be pregnant , they get sick and they get tired .     gk : have you have morning sickness ?     sw : no , I 've be so fortunate and so I have not . but they get really tired and they get really stress out , and I have to really take all that energy , put it in a paper bag , so to say , and throw it away , because I really feel like I do not have time to deal with any extra emotion , any extra anything , because pregnant or not , no one know , and I be suppose to win that tournament as I be every tournament that I show up . I be expect to win , and if I do not win , it be actually much big news .     gk : yeah , when you do not win , that be a big story .     sw : yes , so for I , I have to really take anything negative and any emotion that I be feel at that point and kind of just bottle they up and really figure out what the next step for I to do be .     gk : you have a lot of support . you have a lot of love . even when I be come here , people stop I at the airport . I be say to the flight attendant , the pilot , " guess where I be go ? " they say , " oh my god , we be so glad she be pregnant . " but then you always have these cranky yankee . on the way over here , somebody be tell I about ilie nastase , who say some very unkind , inappropriate , dare I say racial thing . you have respond to he . I be not even go to dignify what he say , but you respond . why do you respond ?     sw : well , I think there be very inappropriate comment , and not only that , I 've be really supportive of my peer and the people that I 've work with . I 've be a pro for almost 20 year , and so for I , it be really important to hold woman up , and it be something that these young woman , they 'll come to the locker room , they 'll want to take picture with I , and for I , it be just like , I want to be able to be a good leader and a good example for they . so not only —     ( applause )     not only do he have rude thing to say about I and my peer , I feel it be important for we to stand up for each other and to stand up for myself . and at that point it be really important for I to say , like , I be not afraid , I be not go anywhere , but this be inappropriate , and there be time and there be a place for everything . and that really be not the time and the place .     gk : we cut the part where you say you be not go anywhere , because you 'll be 36 in september . baby be come , 36 . and your coach say age be always important , but in tennis it be very important , but he have no doubt that you be come back . have you think , be I come back ? will I take some time off ? I know the woman on the tour be say , " how long do it take to have a baby ? two year will she be go ? " what be you think ?     sw : well , I be always try to defy the odd , you know , so for I everything be really mental . I definitely plan on come back . I be not do yet . I be really inspire by my sister . she be a year old than I , and that be something that — if she be still play , I know I can play .     ( laughter )     and there be so many — roger federer , he be a little bit old than I and he be still win everything , so I be like , I know I can do that too . so that be be so inspiring to I , especially recently , and I know that it be something I want to do . and my story be definitely not over yet . I be talk to my coach about it , and we be talk about how this be just a new part of my life , and my baby be go to be in the stand and hopefully cheer for I , not cry too much .     gk : no , you write a beautiful letter to your baby yesterday that you say — from the old mommy to the young one , to the old , to the young , I can not wait for you to get here . a lot of people feel that . I see you about a year ago , because I think about your life , serena . you 've have three life - change thing in a six - month time : pregnant , huge win , fall in love . and when I see you last year , I be say , " how be your love life ? da da da . " you say , " I meet a guy . he be a nerdy , kinda geeky guy . you will not know who he be . " I say , " what be his name ? "     sw : I remember talk to you about that , yes .     gk : and you say , " alexis ohanian . " I say , " I know he ! " he be awesome . but I would never put you with a nerdy geek , and you say , you neither .     sw : I be go to be honest with you , I do not either , but it be be the good thing for I .     gk : the good thing why ? do that look like a nerdy geek ? look at the shirt .     ( laughter )     no , he be a very nice guy .     sw : you can tell he be into technology .     gk : he be a very , very nice guy . I like he very much . so how do he succeed when other have fail ? how be he the one that you know , this be the one for I ?     sw : well , I be not go to say that , but ...     ( laughter )     gk : say it , serena , say it !     sw : well ...     ( laughter )     yes .     ( applause )     gk : but you know what I mean .     sw : he be very loving and he be very kind , and my mom say he be very considerate , and when she say that to I , I be like , you know , he really be , and it be the little thing that really make a huge difference in life .     gk : like ?     sw : something simple . my fashion company , we have a show every year , so in our show last year , I be run around like crazy , because I do everything for the show , and everything for it , so I be run around like crazy , and he , it be a simple gesture of this shirt that he have , and he just want to make sure that I have the same one , and it be — it be a weird story . it be well in person , I promise .     gk : be it a wonderful proposal ? or be it a beyoncé song ? " if you like it then you ought to put a ring on it " ? be you feel pressure to get marry ? do you know it be come ?     sw : yeah , I actually never feel pressure to get marry and I can not say I be the marrying type of person . I really love my life . I love my freedom . I hear that kind of change . but I love everything that I do , and I love my career , and I always feel like I do not want anything to interfere with that . I 've actually be so career - orient and in fact , when he propose , I be almost angry . not almost . I be angry , because it be right in the middle of my training season , and I say , " I got to win the australian open . I can not fly to rome . " because he want to take I to rome , and I say , " I can not . I got to win . " but that be how focused I be .     gk : this be a girl that say , " no , I can not go to rome . " ok .     sw : but I be really focused on reach my goal and I know at that point there be one player that I want to pass . I want to pass steffi graf 's record , and that really mean a lot to I , and when I put my mind to something , I really be determined to reach it no matter what .     gk : you know , you say that for you — I 've hear you say that win be addictive to you .     sw : it be .     gk : what do you mean ?     sw : I feel like win for I be superaddictive . I feel like once you experience it , you always want to get that feeling again , and when I win my first championship , I be only 17 year old , but I never forget that feeling , and I feel like every time I win one , I want to reach that feeling of your first championship . there be really no feeling in the world like that . and it be like , all these year of training and be a little kid and playing , and then win be a wonderful experience . so for I I 've always feel like I love that feeling , and obviously I do not like the feeling of lose . I feel like —     gk : no , in fact , people close to you say you be a very bad loser .     sw : I be not the good loser .     gk : that you be very , very , very bad . listen , no athlete , no champion like to lose . I get that . but they say when it come to lose , you be very , very , very bad at it .     ( laughter )     sw : I be number one at lose too , so you know , that be all I can say .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     gk : I be always curious about the dynamic between you and venus , because everybody that know you and have follow the story know that you two be very close , and you always bring your a game in whatever you do , but I often wonder , when you be play she , do you bring your a- game because you want to do something for she or do you bring your a++ game because you want to crush she . be it hard for you play she or easy ?     sw : well , play venus be like play myself , because we grow up play each other , we grow up practice together . and it be something that have be difficult , because she be my tough opponent . she be tall , she be fast , she hit hard like I , she serve like I . it be really like play a wall .     gk : she know you .     sw : she know where I be hit the ball before I hit it , so it be something that be not very easy , but it be really about , when I go out there , I really have to shut down my mind and I have to say to myself , " you know what ? I be just play a great player , but today I have to be well . I do not care who it be , if it be my sister or it be my friend , today be the day I have to show up and I have to be well and I have to want it more than anyone else at this moment anywhere on this world . "     gk : so never on the court do you fall back for venus ? because , you know , it be always venus and serena .     sw : yes .     gk : and now baby sister have surpass old sister . do you feel guilt about that ? do you feel joy in that ? be that a difficult position for you ?     sw : I do not feel anything in there . in my life , it still and forever be always go to be venus and serena . she be really love of my life , she be my good friend , she be my soul mate . I mean — there be picture of she push I , really low - quality picture or else I would have share they , of she push I in a stroller on a tennis court , and she always take care of I . I use to spend all of my allowance money on the ice cream truck and stuff , and she would take her money and give it to I at school and make sure I have something to eat and she would go without , and that be the kind of person she actually be since I 've always know she . so we always have this incredible respect for each other and this incredible love , and I think it be important for people to realize you can be successful but you can still have a wonderful relationship . on the court we be mortal enemy , but the second we shake hand , we be good friend again . and if I lose , it might be a day later for I , but for venu —     ( laughter )     gk : there be never a time on the court where you hit the ball and say , " that be for seventh grade when you do the blah blah blah " ? you never have any moment like that ?     sw : I feel like she should have those moment , because she be never do anything bad to I , but I be the young . I be the young sister .     gk : serena , she be never do anything bad to you ? really ? I have three sister . I can think of some stuff I 've do bad .     sw : unless she brainwash I to forget they .     gk : no , but the love you have for she I know be very pure . I know that .     sw : yes . gk : I know that .     sw : we be always bring up to be superclose , and we be incredibly close . not only she . I have three other sister as well , and we be always so close .     gk : so before a big match , the two of you do not get together and say , look , we be go to go out there and — there be nothing ?     sw : well , it be funny . before the australian open , we be in the locker room together , and I always pick on she , so I pull out my camera while she be change . I start take picture of she , which be totally inappropriate , but she be so mad at I . she be like , " serena , stop ! " and I be just laugh at she . but that be the kind of relationship that we have , and like I say , the second we step on the court , it be like , we be definitely mortal enemy , but the second we step off , and moment before , we be just — it be what it be , because at the end of the day , she 'll always be my sister . I be not go to play australia in — well , who know , I 've be play forever , but I do not think I 'll be play in 50 year , say ? let us be safe and say 50 year .     gk : I do not know , serena . there be never be anybody like you . when you think about it , never be anybody who have intersect gender and race the way you have , the dominance that you have and the scrutiny that you have . and when you be grow up , do you say , " I want to be like that " ? because now little girl be look at you say , " I want to be like that . " who be the " I want to be like that " for you ?     sw : well , it be interesting , and I be glad you bring that up . for I , when I grow up , I always want to be the good , and I say , if you want to be the good , you 've get to emulate the good . so when I start to go on tour when I be really young , I would see steffi graf , I would see monica sele , and I would even see pete sampras , and I would see what they do , and I notice that steffi and monica do not really talk to a lot of the other player , and they kind of be on their own , and they be just so focused and I would see pete sampras , the technique that he do , and I be like , " I want to do that . " so I do that , and I feel that to be the good , and if you want to be the good , you have to hang around people and you have to look at people that be the good , because you be not go to be the good if you be look at someone that be not at the top level .     gk : people say nobody work as hard as you .     sw : I be a very hard worker . gk : that be what I hear .     sw : people say , " oh , she be talente , she be athletic . " actually , I be not . I be really small for my age . I grow up when I get old , and I have to work really hard , and I think one of the reason why I fight so hard and I work so hard be because I be really , really , really small .     gk : yeah . you be no long small .     sw : no , I be fully grow now . but I be small when I be really young for whatever reason . I think venu maybe eat all the wheatie .     gk : you know , the other thing people talk about be your body . your body bring man and woman to their knee . and I mean in a good way . a lot have be make about your body . it be a work of art , it be masculine , it be glorious , there be never be anything like it . do you have body issue when you be grow up ? have you always be comfortable with your body ?     sw : it be interesting , because when you be a teenage female grow up in the public eye , it be a lot of scrutiny that you face , and as any female that be a teenager , I definitely be not comfortable in my body . I do not like it . I do not understand why I have muscle . and I stop lift weight . I be like , I be not go to do this . but then after I win the us open , I realize that my body help I reach goal that I want to reach , and I want to be happy with it , and I be so appreciative of it . I be always healthy . I be really fortunate and superblessed , and I feel like not only be I happy with my body , but I want other people and other young girl that have experience what I 've experience to be happy with themselves . so whatever people say — masculine , whatever , too much , too little — I be ok with it as long as I love myself .     ( applause )     gk : I know you learn a lot from win , but what have you learn from lose ?     sw : I hate to lose , but I think lose have bring I here today . the only reason I be who I be be because of my loss , and some of they be extremely painful , but I would not take any of they away , because every time I lose , it take a really long time for I to lose again because I learn so much from it . and I encourage everyone that I talk to — I be like , listen , if you lose or if something happen — not in sport — in business or in school — learn from it . do not live in the past , live in the present , and do not make the same mistake in the future . that be something that I always try to live by .     gk : now you be plan a wedding and I want to know , be it a destination wedding in the catskill or pocono or be you go to do it in florida ? what be you think ? big or small ?     sw : we be think medium size . we do not want to do too big , but then we be like , ok , we can not say no to this person , this person . so we be think medium size and we be just think — my personality be a lot of fun . hopefully you can see that today . I be not too serious .     gk : and you like to dance . and the next chapter for serena williams be what ?     sw : oh , next for I . obviously I be go to have a baby and I be go to stay fit and kind of come back and play tennis and keep work on my fashion line . that 'll be really fun .     gk : do you know if it be a boy or girl ?     sw : I do not . I have a feeling of one or the other . it be a 50 - 50 chance , but I have a feeling .     gk : gayle be a unisex name . whatever you and alexis decide , we be cheer you on !     sw : thank you for that . gk : you be welcome . we be cheer you on , serena williams . sw : thank you so much .     thank you guy .     ( applause )  
   how many people here would like to live to be at least 80 year old ? yeah . I think we all have this hopeful expectation of live into old age . let us project out into the future , to your future " you be , " and let us imagine that we be all 85 . now , everyone look at two people . one of you probably have alzheimer 's disease .     ( laughter )     alright , alright . and maybe you be think , " well , it will not be I . " then , ok . you be a caregiver . so —     ( laughter )     so in some way , this terrifying disease be likely to affect we all .     part of the fear around alzheimer 's stem from the sense that there be nothing we can do about it . despite decade of research , we still have no disease - modify treatment and no cure . so if we be lucky enough to live long enough , alzheimer 's appear to be our brain 's destiny .     but maybe it do not have to be . what if I tell you we could change these statistic , literally change our brain 's destiny , without rely on a cure or advancement in medicine ?     let us begin by look at what we currently understand about the neuroscience of alzheimer 's . here be a picture of two neuron connect . the point of connection , this space circle in red , be call the synapse . the synapse be where neurotransmitter be release . this be where signal be transmit , where communication happen . this be where we think , feel , see , hear , desire ... and remember . and the synapse be where alzheimer 's happen .     let us zoom in on the synapse and look at a cartoon representation of what be go on . during the business of communicate information , in addition to release neurotransmitter like glutamate into the synapse , neuron also release a small peptide call amyloid beta . normally , amyloid beta be clear away metabolize by microglia , the janitor cell of our brain . while the molecular cause of alzheimer 's be still debate , most neuroscientist believe that the disease begin when amyloid beta begin to accumulate . too much be release , or not enough be clear away , and the synapse begin to pile up with amyloid beta . and when this happen , it bind to itself , form sticky aggregate call amyloid plaque .     how many people here be 40 year old or old ? you be afraid to admit it now . this initial step into the disease , this presence of amyloid plaque accumulate , can already be find in your brain . the only way we could be sure of this would be through a pet scan , because at this point , you be blissfully unaware . you be not show any impairment in memory , language , or cognition ... yet . we think it take at least 15 to 20 year of amyloid plaque accumulation before it reach a tipping point , then trigger a molecular cascade that cause the clinical symptom of the disease . prior to the tipping point , your lapse in memory might include thing like , " why do I come in this room ? " or " oh ... what be his name ? " or " where do I put my key ? "     now , before you all start freak out again , because I know half of you do at least one of those in the last 24 hour — these be all normal kind of forget . in fact , I would argue that these example might not even involve your memory , because you do not pay attention to where you put your key in the first place . after the tipping point , the glitch in memory , language and cognition be different . instead of eventually find your key in your coat pocket or on the table by the door , you find they in the refrigerator , or you find they and you think , " what be these for ? "     so what happen when amyloid plaque accumulate to this tipping point ? our microglia janitor cell become hyper - activate , release chemical that cause inflammation and cellular damage . we think they might actually start clear away the synapsis themselves . a crucial neural transport protein call " tau " become hyperphosphorylated and twist itself into something call " tangle , " which choke off the neuron from the inside . by mid - stage alzheimer 's , we have massive inflammation and tangle and all - out war at the synapse and cell death .     so if you be a scientist try to cure this disease , at what point would you ideally want to intervene ? many scientist be bet big on the simple solution : keep amyloid plaque from reach that tipping point , which mean that drug discovery be largely focused on develop a compound that will prevent , eliminate , or reduce amyloid plaque accumulation . so the cure for alzheimer 's will likely be a preventative medicine . we be go to have to take this pill before we reach that tipping point , before the cascade be trigger , before we start leave our key in the refrigerator . we think this be why , to date , these kind of drug have fail in clinical trial — not because the science be not sound , but because the people in these trial be already symptomatic . it be too late . think of amyloid plaque as a light match . at the tipping point , the match set fire to the forest . once the forest be ablaze , it do not do any good to blow out the match . you have to blow out the match before the forest catch fire .     even before scientist sort this out , this information be actually really good news for we , because it turn out that the way we live can influence the accumulation of amyloid plaque . and so there be thing we can do to keep we from reach that tipping point .     let us picture your risk of alzheimer 's as a see - saw scale . we be go to pile risk factor on one arm , and when that arm hit the floor , you be symptomatic and diagnose with alzheimer 's . let us imagine you be 50 year old . you be not a spring chicken anymore , so you 've accumulate some amyloid plaque with age . your scale be tip a little bit .     now let us look at your dna . we 've all inherit our gene from our mom and our dad . some of these gene will increase our risk and some will decrease it . if you be like alice in " still alice , " you 've inherit a rare genetic mutation that crank out amyloid beta , and this alone will tip your scale arm to the ground . but for most of we , the gene we inherit will only tip the arm a bit . for example , apoe4 be a gene variant that increase amyloid , but you can inherit a copy of apoe4 from mom and dad and still never get alzheimer 's , which mean that for most of we , our dna alone do not determine whether we get alzheimer 's . so what do ? we can not do anything about get old or the gene we 've inherit . so far , we have not change our brain 's destiny .     what about sleep ? in slow - wave deep sleep , our glial cell rinse cerebral spinal fluid throughout our brain , clear away metabolic waste that accumulate in our synapsis while we be awake . deep sleep be like a power cleanse for the brain . but what happen if you shortchange yourself on sleep ? many scientist believe that poor sleep hygiene might actually be a predictor of alzheimer 's . a single night of sleep deprivation lead to an increase in amyloid beta . and amyloid accumulation have be show to disrupt sleep , which in turn cause more amyloid to accumulate . and so now we have this positive feedback loop that be go to accelerate the tipping of that scale .     what else ? cardiovascular health . high blood pressure , diabetes , obesity , smoking , high cholesterol , have all be show to increase our risk of develop alzheimer 's . some autopsy study have show that as many as 80 percent of people with alzheimer 's also have cardiovascular disease . aerobic exercise have be show in many study to decrease amyloid beta in animal model of the disease . so a heart - healthy mediterranean lifestyle and diet can help to counter the tipping of this scale .     so there be many thing we can do to prevent or delay the onset of alzheimer 's . but let us say you have not do any of they . let us say you be 65 ; there be alzheimer 's in your family , so you 've likely inherit a gene or two that tip your scale arm a bit ; you 've be burn the candle at both end for year ; you love bacon ; and you do not run unless someone be chase you .     ( laughter )     let us imagine that your amyloid plaque have reach that tipping point . your scale arm have crash to the floor . you 've trip the cascade , set fire to the forest , cause inflammation , tangle , and cell death . you should be symptomatic for alzheimer 's . you should be have trouble find word and key and remember what I say at the beginning of this talk . but you might not be .     there be one more thing you can do to protect yourself from experience the symptom of alzheimer 's , even if you have the full - blow disease pathology ablaze in your brain . it have to do with neural plasticity and cognitive reserve . remember , the experience of have alzheimer 's be ultimately a result of lose synapsis . the average brain have over a hundred trillion synapsis , which be fantastic ; we 've get a lot to work with . and this be not a static number . we gain and lose you all the time , through a process call neural plasticity . every time we learn something new , we be create and strengthen new neural connection , new synapsis .     in the nun study , 678 nun , all over the age of 75 when the study begin , be follow for more than two decade . they be regularly give physical checkup and cognitive test , and when they die , their brain be all donate for autopsy . in some of these brain , scientist discover something surprising . despite the presence of plaque and tangle and brain shrinkage — what appear to be unquestionable alzheimer 's — the nun who have belong to these brain show no sign of have the disease while they be alive .     how can this be ? we think it be because these nun have a high level of cognitive reserve , which be a way of say that they have more functional synapsis . people who have more year of formal education , who have a high degree of literacy , who engage regularly in mentally stimulating activity , all have more cognitive reserve . they have an abundance and a redundancy in neural connection . so even if they have a disease like alzheimer 's compromise some of their synapsis , they 've get many extra backup connection , and this buffer they from notice that anything be amiss .     let us imagine a simplified example . let us say you only know one thing about a subject . let us say it be about I . you know that lisa genova write " still alice , " and that be the only thing you know about I . you have that single neural connection , that one synapse . now imagine you have alzheimer 's . you have plaque and tangle and inflammation and microglia devour that synapse . now when someone ask you , " hey , who write ' still alice ? ' " you can not remember , because that synapse be either fail or go . you 've forget I forever .     but what if you have learn more about I ? let us say you learn four thing about I . now imagine you have alzheimer 's , and three of those synapsis be damage or destroy . you still have a way to detour the wreckage . you can still remember my name . so we can be resilient to the presence of alzheimer 's pathology through the recruitment of yet - undamaged pathway . and we create these pathway , this cognitive reserve , by learn new thing . ideally , we want these new thing to be as rich in meaning as possible , recruiting sight and sound and association and emotion .     so this really do not mean do crossword puzzle . you do not want to simply retrieve information you 've already learn , because this be like travel down old , familiar street , cruise neighborhood you already know . you want to pave new neural road . build an alzheimer's - resistant brain mean learn to speak italian , meet new friend , read a book , or listen to a great ted talk .     and if , despite all of this , you be someday diagnose with alzheimer 's , there be three lesson I 've learn from my grandmother and the dozen of people I 've come to know live with this disease . diagnosis do not mean you be die tomorrow . keep live . you will not lose your emotional memory . you 'll still be able to understand love and joy . you might not remember what I say five minute ago , but you 'll remember how I make you feel . and you be more than what you can remember .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   let us say you despise western democracy . democracy , in all its trapping , free election , town hall , endless debate about the proper role of government . too messy , too unpredictable , too constrain for your taste . and the way these democracy band together and lecture everyone else about individual right and freedom — it get under your skin .     so what to do about it ? you can call out the hypocrisy and failure of western democracy and explain how your way be well , but that be never really work for you . what if you could get the people whose support be the very foundation of these democracy to start question the system ? make the idea occur in their own mind that democracy and its institution be fail they , their elite be corrupt puppet master and the country they know be in free fall . to do that , you 'll need to infiltrate the information sphere of these democracy . you 'll need to turn their most powerful asset — an open mind — into their great vulnerability . you 'll need people to question the truth .     now , you 'll be familiar of hack and leak that happen in 2016 . one be the democratic national committee 's network , and the personal email account of its staff , later release on wikileak . after that , various online persona , like a suppose romanian cybercriminal who do not speak romanian , aggressively push news of these leak to journalist . the medium take the bait . they be consume by how much the dnc hate bernie . at the time , it be that narrative that far outshine the news that a group of russian government sponsor hacker who we call " advanced persistent threat 28 , " or " apt28 " for short , be carry out these operation against the us .     and there be no shortage of evidence . this group of russian government hacker have not just appear out of nowhere in 2016 . we have start track this group back in 2014 . and the tool that apt28 use to compromise its victim ' network demonstrate a thoughtful , well - resource effort that have take place for now over a decade in moscow 's time zone from about 9 am to 6 pm . apt28 love to prey on the email and contact of journalist in chechnya , the georgian government , eastern european defense attachés — all target with an undeniable interest to the russian government .     we be not the only one onto this . government , research team across the world , be come to similar conclusion and observe the same type of operation . but what russia be do in 2016 go far beyond espionage . the dnc hack be just one of many where steal datum be post online accompany by a sensational narrative , then amplify in social medium for lightning - speed adoption by the medium . this do not ring the alarm bell that a nation - state be try to interfere with the credibility of another 's internal affair .     so why , collectively , do we not see this come ? why do it take month before americans understand that they be under a state - sponsor information attack ? the easy answer be politic . the obama administration be catch in a perfect catch-22 . by raise the specter that the russian government be interfere in the us presidential campaign , the administration risk appear to meddle in the campaign itself . but the well answer , I think , be that the us and the west be utterly unequipped to recognize and respond to a modern information operation , despite the fact that the we have wield information with devastating success in an era not so long ago .     look , so while the us and the west spend the last 20 year catch up in cybersecurity — what network to harden , which infrastructure to deem critical , how to set up army of cyber warrior and cyber command — russia be think in far more consequential term . before the first iphone even hit the shelf , the russian government understand the risk and the opportunity that technology provide and the inter - communication and instant communication it provide we .     as our reality be increasingly base on the information that we be consume at the palm of our hand and from the news feed that we be scan and the hashtag and story that we see trend , the russian government be the first to recognize how this evolution have turn your mind into the most exploitable device on the planet . and your mind be particularly exploitable if you be accustomed to an unfettered flow of information , now increasingly curate to your own taste . this panorama of information that be so interesting to you give a state , or anyone for that matter , a perfect back door into your mind .     it be this new brand of state - sponsor information operation that can be that much more successful , more insidious , and hard for the target audience — that include the medium — to decipher and characterize . if you can get a hashtag trend on twitter , or chum the water with fake news direct to audience prime to receive it , or drive journalist to dissect terabyte of email for a cent of impropriety — all tactic use in russian operation — then you 've get a shot at effectively camouflage your operation in the mind of your target . this be what russia 's long call " reflexive control . " it be the ability to use information on someone else so that they make a decision on their own accord that be favorable to you . this be nation - state - grade image control and perception management , and it be conduct by any mean , with any tool , network - base or otherwise , that will achieve it .     take this for another example . in early february 2014 , a few week before russia would invade crimea , a phone call be post on youtube . in it , there be two us diplomat . they sound like they be play kingmaker in ukraine , and bad , they curse the eu for its lack of speed and leadership in resolve the crisis . the medium cover the phone call , and then the ensue diplomatic backlash leave washington and europe reel . and it create a fissure response and a feckless attitude towards russia 's land grab in ukraine . mission accomplish .     so while hack phone call and email and network keep grab the headline , the real operation be the one that be influence the decision you make and the opinion you hold , all in the service of a nation - state 's strategic interest . this be power in the information age . and this information be all that much more seductive , all that much easy to take at face value and pass on , when it be authentic . who be not interested in the truth that be present in phone call and email that be never intend for public consumption ? but how meaningful be that truth if you do not know why it be be reveal to you ?     we must recognize that this place where we be increasingly live , which we 've quaintly term " cyberspace , " be not define by one and zero , but by information and the people behind it . this be far more than a network of computer and device . this be a network compose of mind interact with computer and device .     and for this network , there be no encryption , there be no firewall , no two - factor authentication , no password complex enough to protect you . what you have for defense be far strong , it be more adaptable , it be always run the late version . it be the ability to think critically : call out falsehood , press for the fact . and above all , you must have the courage to unflinchingly pursue the truth .     ( applause )  
vanessa garrison : I be vanessa , daughter of annette , daughter of olympia , daughter of melvina , daughter of katie , bear 1878 , parish county , louisiana .     t. morgan dixon : and my name be morgan , daughter of carol , daughter of letha , daughter of willie , daughter of sarah , bear 1849 in bardstown , kentucky .     vg : and in the tradition of our family , the great oral tradition of almost every black church we know honor the culture from which we draw so much power , we be going to start the way our momma and grandmas would want we to start .     tmd : in prayer . let the word of my mouth , the meditation of our heart , be acceptable in thy sight , oh lord , my strength and my redeemer .     vg : we call the name and ritual of our ancestor into this room today because from they we receive a powerful blueprint for survival , strategy and tactic for healing carry across ocean by african woman , pass down to generation of black woman in america who use those skill to navigate institution of slavery and state - sponsor discrimination in order that we might stand on this stage . we walk in the footstep of those woman , our foremother , legend like ella baker , septima clark , fannie lou hamer , from whom we learn the power of organize after she would have single - handedly register 60,000 voter in jim crow mississippi .     tmd : 60,000 be a lot of people , so if you can imagine I and vanessa inspire 60,000 woman to walk with we last year , we be fire up . but today , 100,000 black woman and girl stand on this stage with we . we be committed to heal ourselves , to lace up our sneaker , to walk out of our front door every single day for total healing and transformation in our community , because we understand that we be in the footstep of a civil right legacy like no other time before , and that we be face a health crisis like never ever before . and so we 've have a lot of moment , great moment , include the time we have on our pajama , we be work on our computer and michelle obama email we and invite we to the white house , and we think it be spam . but this moment here be an opportunity . it be an opportunity that we do not take for grant , and so we think long and hard about how we would use it . would we talk to the woman we hope to inspire , a million in the next year , or would we talk to you ? we decide to talk to you , and to talk to you about a question that we get all the time , so that the million of woman who hopefully will watch this will never have to answer it again . it be : why be black woman die fast and at high rate than any other group of people in america from preventable , obesity - relate disease ?     the question hurt I . I be shake a little bit . it feel value - laden . it hurt my body because the weight represent so much . but we be go to talk about it and invite you into an inside conversation today because it be necessary , and because we need you .     vg : each night , before the first day of school , my grandmother would sit I next to the stove and with expert precision use a hot comb to press my hair . my grandmother be legendary , big , loud . she fill up a room with laughter and oftentime curse word . she cook a mean peach cobbler , have 11 child , a house full of grandchild , and like every black woman I know , like most all woman I know , she have prioritize the care of other over care for herself . we measure her strength by her capacity to endure pain and suffering . we celebrate she for it , and our choice would prove to be deadly . one night after press my hair before the first day of eighth grade , my grandmother go to bed and never wake up , dead at 66 year old from a heart attack . by the time I would graduate college , I would lose two more beloved family member to chronic disease : my aunt diane , dead at 55 , my aunt tricia , dead at 63 . after live with these loss , the hole that they leave , I decide to calculate the life expectancy of the woman in my family . stare back at I , the number 65 . I know I could not sit by and watch another woman I love die an early death .     tmd : so we do not usually put our business in the street . let us just put that out there . but I have to tell you the statistic . black woman be die at alarming rate , and I use to be a classroom teacher , and I be at south atlanta high school , and I remember stand in front of my classroom , and I remember a statistic that half of black girl will get diabetes unless diet and level of activity change . half of the girl in my classroom . so I could not teach anymore . so I start take girl hike , which be why we be call girltrek , but vanessa be like , that be not go to move the dial on the health crisis ; it be cute . she be like , it be a cute hiking club . so what we think be if we could rally a million of their mother ... 82 percent of black woman be over a healthy weight right now . 53 percent of we be obese . but the number that I can not , that I can not get out of my head be that every single day in america , 137 black woman die from a preventable disease , heart disease . that be every 11 minute . 137 be more than gun violence , cigarette smoking and hiv combine , every day . it be roughly the amount of people that be on my plane from new jersey to vancouver . can you imagine that ? a plane fill with black woman crash to the ground every day , and no one be talk about it .     vg : so the question that you be all ask yourself right now be why ? why be black woman die ? we ask ourselves that same question . why be what be out there not work for they ? private weight loss company , government intervention , public health campaign . I be go to tell you why : because they focus on weight loss or look good in skinny jean without acknowledge the trauma that black woman hold in our belly and bone , that have be embed in our very dna . the good advice from hospital and doctor , the good medication from pharmaceutical company to treat the congestive heart failure of my grandmother do not work because they do not acknowledge the systemic racism that she have deal with since birth .     ( applause )     a divestment in school , discriminatory housing practice , predatory lending , a crack cocaine epidemic , mass incarceration put more black body behind bar than be own at the height of slavery .     but girltrek do . for black woman whose body be buckle under the weight of system never design to support they , girltrek be a lifeline . august 16 , 2015 , danita kimball , a member of girltrek in detroit , receive the news that too many black mother have receive . her son norman , 23 year old , a father of two , be gun down while on an afternoon drive . imagine the grief that overcome your body in that moment , the immobilize fear . now , know this , that just day after lay her son to rest , danita kimball post online , " I do not know what to do or how to move forward , but my sister keep tell I I need to walk , so I will . " and then just day after that , " I get my step in today for my baby norm . it feel good to be out there , to walk . "     tmd : walk through pain be what we have always do . my mom , she be in the middle right there , my mom desegregate her high school in 1955 . her mom walk down the step of an abandon school bus where she raise 11 kid as a sharecropper . and her mom step onto indian territory flee the terror of the jim crow south . and her mom walk her man to the door as he go off to fight in the kentucky color regiment , the civil war . they be bear slave but they would not die slave . change - making , it be in my blood . it be what I do , and this health crisis be not nothing compare to the road we have travel .     ( applause )     so it be like james cleveland . I do not feel no way tired , so we get to work . we start look at model of change . we look all over the world . we need something not only that be a part of our cultural inheritance like walk , but something that be scalable , something that be high - impact , something that we could replicate across this country . so we study model like wangari maathai , who win the nobel peace prize for inspire woman to plant 50 million tree in kenya . she bring kenya back from the brink of environmental devastation . we study these system of change , and we look at walk scientifically . and what we learn be that walk just 30 minute a day can single - handedly decrease 50 percent of your risk of diabetes , heart disease , stroke , even alzheimer 's and dementia . we know that walking be the single most powerful thing that a woman can do for her health , so we know we be on to something , because from harriet tubman to the woman in montgomery , when black woman walk , thing change .     ( applause )     vg : so how do we take this simple idea of walk and start a revolution that would catch a fire in neighborhood across america ? we use the good practice of the civil right movement . we huddle up in church basement . we do grapevine information share through beauty salon . we empower and train mother to stand on the front line . we take our message directly to the street , and woman respond . woman like lakeisha in chattanooga , chrysantha in detroit , onika in new orleans , woman with difficult name and difficult story join girltrek every day and commit to walk as a practice of self - care . once walk , those woman get to organize , first their family , then their community , to walk and talk and solve problem together . they walk and notice the abandon building . they walk and notice the lack of sidewalk , the lack of green space , and they say , " no more . " woman like susie paige in philadelphia , who after walk daily past an abandon building in her neighborhood , decide , " I be not wait . let I rally my team . let I grab some supply . let I do what no one else have do for I and my community . "     tmd : we know one woman can make a difference , because one woman have already change the world , and her name be harriet tubman . and trust I , I love harriet tubman . I be obsess with she , and I use to be a history teacher . I will not tell you the whole history . I will tell you four thing . so I use to have an old saab — the kind of canvas top that drip on your head when it rain — and I drive all the way down to the eastern shore of maryland , and when I step on the dirt that harriet tubman make her first escape , I know she be a woman just like we be and that we could do what she have do , and we learn four thing from harriet tubman .     the first one : do not wait . walk right now in the direction of your healthiest , most fulfil life , because self - care be a revolutionary act .     number two : when you learn the way forward , come back and get a sister . so in our case , start a team with your friend — your friend , your family , your church .     number three : rally your ally . every single person in this room be complicit in a tubman - inspire takeover .     and number four : find joy . the most underreported fact of harriet tubman be that she live to be 93 year old , and she do not live just an ordinary life ; uh - uh . she be stand up for the good guy . she marry a young man . she adopt a child . I be not kid . she live . and I drive up to her house of freedom in upstate new york , and she have plant apple tree , and when I be there on a sunday , they be bloom . do you call it — do they bloom ? the apple be in season , and I be think , she leave fruit for we , the legacy of harriet tubman , every single year . and we know that we be harriet , and we know that there be a harriet in every community in america .     vg : we also know that there be a harriet in every community across the globe , and that they could learn from our tubman doctrine , as we call it , the four step . imagine the possibility beyond the neighborhood of oakland and newark , to the woman work rice field in vietnam , tea field in sri lanka , the woman on the mountainside in guatemala , the indigenous reservation throughout the vast plain of the dakota . we believe that woman walk and talk together to solve their problem be a global solution .     tmd : and I 'll leave you with this , because we also believe it can become the center of social justice again . vanessa and I be in fort lauderdale . we have an organizer training , and I be leave and I get on the airplane , and I see someone I know , so I wave , and as I be wait in that long line that you guy know , wait for people to put their stuff away , I look back and I realize I do not know the woman but I recognize she . and so I blow she a kiss because it be sybrina fulton , trayvon martin 's mom , and she whisper " thank you " back to I . and I can not help but wonder what would happen if there be group of woman walk on trayvon 's block that day , or what would happen in the south side of chicago every day if there be group of woman and mother and aunt and cousin walk , or along the polluted river of flint , michigan . I believe that walking can transform our community , because it be already start to .     vg : we believe that the personal be political . our walking be for healing , for joy , for fresh air , quiet time , to connect and disconnect , to worship . but it be also walk so we can be healthy enough to stand on the front line for change in our community , and it be our call to action to every black woman listen , every black woman in earshot of our voice , every black woman who you know . think about it : the woman work front desk reception at your job , the woman who deliver your mail , your neighbor — our call to action to they , to join we on the front line for change in your community .     tmd : and I 'll bring we back to this moment and why it be so important for my dear , dear friend vanessa and i. it be because it be not always easy for we , and in fact , we have both see really , really dark day , from the hate speech to the summer of police brutality and violence that we see last year , to even lose one of our walker , sandy bland , who die in police custody . but the most courageous thing we do every day be we practice faith that go beyond the fact , and we put foot to our prayer every single day , and when we get overwhelmed , we think of the word of people like sonia sanchez , a poet laureate , who say , " morgan , where be your fire ? where be the fire that burn hole through slave ship to make we breathe ? where be the fire that turn gut into chitlin , that take rhythm and make jazz , that take sit - in and marche and make we jump boundary and barrier ? you 've get to find it and pass it on . "     so this be we find our fire and pass it on to you . so please , stand with we , walk with we as we rally a million woman to reclaim the street of the 50 high need community in this country .     we thank you so much for this opportunity .     ( applause )
   ( sing ) water boy     ( guitar strum )     where be you hidin ' ?     ( guitar strum )     if you do not come right here , I be going to tell your pa on you .     ( guitar strum )     there be not no hammer —     ( guitar strum )     that be on this mountain     ( guitar strum )     that ring like mine , boy —     ( guitar strum )     that ring like mine .     ( guitar strum )     I be going to bust this rock , boy —     ( guitar strum )     from here to macon .     ( guitar strum )     all the way to the jail , boy —     ( guitar strum )     all the way to the jail .     ( guitar strum )     you jack of diamond —     ( music )     you jack of diamond I know you of old boy , I know you of old . you do rob my pocket , you do rob my pocket of silver and gold , boy , of silver and gold .     water boy , where be you hidin ' ? if you do not come right here , I be going to tell your pa on you . there be not no hammer that be on this mountain that ring like mine , boy , that ring like mine .     I be going to bust this rock , boy , from here to macon . all the way to the jail , boy , all the way to the jail .     water boy     ( guitar strum )     where be you hidin ' ?     ( guitar strum )     if you do not come right here , if you do not come right here , if you do not come right here , I be going to tell your pa on you .     ( guitar strum )     ( applause )     thank you .     that be a song base on numerous work song , and it be arrange by odetta , a hero of mine . and this next song , well , I do a lot of historical music , start with the carolina chocolate drop and continue on in my solo endeavor . and I believe that know your history as a musician be super important — it be important as a person , it be important as a country , it be important as a people .     so I read a lot about where the music come from and where this country come from . I 've be read a lot about the civil war and about slavery . and it be really tough . you know ? it be really tough reading . and so as an artist , what I do with all that emotion , read these people 's story , not just , " oh , slavery be terrible . " yes , it be . but it be read individual narrative of how it be for these people . you know ? then it be like , " yeah , that could 've be I . " and it be people now . you know ? so what you do with all that emotion be you 've get to do something with it . as an artist , I write . so I write a song base on some of those narrative that I read , and it be call , " come love come . " we be go to do it for you now .     ( clap )     ( sing ) come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     ( music )     ( sing ) when I be four , my love mam be corner by the boss 's man . she turn her head and got strike down , they bury she in the cold , cold ground .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     ( music )     when I be 12 , my father dear be strong of arm and free of fear until the day he raise his hand , then he be sell to alabama .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     ( music )     when I be 16 , find my bloom and find my man , we jump the broom . we pledge each other the rest of our life and on saturday night we be man and wife .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     ( music )     when I be 18 , bugle call and boy in blue come o'er the wall . I take my chance and follow free , they lead the way to tennessee .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     ( music )     now here I sit in a tiny shack with 13 other at my back . I 've send you word , so all I can do be wait and wait and wait and wait and wait and wait for you .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     come love come , the road lie low , the way be long and hard , I know . come love come , the road lie free , I 'll wait for you in tennessee .     oh , oh , oh . whoa ... oh I 'll wait for you .     I 'll wait for you . I 'll wait for you I 'll wait for you .     ( applause )     thank you .     so , with the dark you have to have the light . and in the african - american community , it be be the work of many hundred of year to find a way to lift ourselves up . so I be go to end with a couple of tune from sister rosetta tharpe , one of the more influential american music figure that most of you probably never hear of . if you have , I be so happy . she be one of the innovator of rock ' n ' roll guitar , and one of the first crossover artist from gospel to secular . she be an incredibly important figure , and I be go to talk about she whenever I can . so these be a couple of her tune . and do not worry — you be go to get your chance to sing .     ( music )     ( sing ) look down , look down that lonesome road before you travel on .     look up , look up and greet your maker , for gabriel blow his horn .     weary totin ' such a load , going down that lonesome road . look down that lonesome road , before you travel on .     look down , look down that lonesome road before you travel on .     look up , look up and greet your maker , for gabriel blow his horn .     weary totin ' such a load , going down that lonesome road .     look down , look down , look down , look down that lonesome road before you travel on .     up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air music in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air I hear music in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air music in the air     and I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere .     up above my head up above my head I hear singin ' in the air singin ' in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear singin ' in the air I hear singin ' in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear singin ' in the air singin ' in the air and I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere .     ( speak ) all right now , guitar man !     ( guitar music )     that be hubby jenkin , you all .     ( sing ) up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin ' in the air shoutin ' in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin ' in the air I hear shoutin ' in the air .     up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin ' in the air , that be right , and I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere .     ( speak ) all right now , give I some of that bass .     ( bass solo )     yeah ! woo !     jason sypher on the bass .     jamie dick on those drum .     all right now , I be run out of time . so it be time for you all to sing . this be the call - and - response . I call , you respond . there be so many song like this , you all know how it go , do not you ? you be go to sing along ? I say , be you go to sing along ?     audience member : yes !     rhiannon gidden : here we go !     ( sing ) up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : music in the air     am : music in the air .     rg : up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : music in the air     am : music in the air     rg : up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : music in the air     am : music in the air     rg : and I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere .     one more time !     up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : I hear music in the air     am : music in the air .     rg : up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : I hear music in the air     am : music in the air .     rg : up above my head     am : up above my head     rg : I hear music in the air     am : music in the air     rg : and I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere . I say I really do believe I really do believe there be a heaven somewhere .     heaven somewhere .     ( hold note )     ( applause and cheer )     ( music end )     ( applause )  
   my seven - year - old grandson sleep just down the hall from I , and he wake up a lot of morning and he say , " you know , this could be the good day ever . " and other time , in the middle of the night , he call out in a tremulous voice , " nana , will you ever get sick and die ? "     I think this pretty much say it for I and most of the people I know , that we be a mixed grill of happy anticipation and dread . so I sit down a few day before my 61st birthday , and I decide to compile a list of everything I know for sure . there be so little truth in the popular culture , and it be good to be sure of a few thing .     for instance , I be no long 47 , although this be the age I feel , and the age I like to think of myself as be . my friend paul use to say in his late 70 that he feel like a young man with something really wrong with he .     ( laughter )     our true person be outside of time and space , but look at the paperwork , I can , in fact , see that I be bear in 1954 . my inside self be outside of time and space . it do not have an age . I be every age I 've ever be , and so be you , although I can not help mention as an aside that it might have be helpful if I have not follow the skin care rule of the ' 60 , which involve get as much sun as possible while slather in baby oil and bask in the glow of a tinfoil reflector shield .     ( laughter )     it be so liberating , though , to face the truth that I be no long in the last throe of middle age , that I decide to write down every single true thing I know . people feel really doom and overwhelm these day , and they keep ask I what be true . so I hope that my list of thing I be almost positive about might offer some basic operate instruction to anyone who be feel really overwhelmed or beleaguered .     number one : the first and true thing be that all truth be a paradox . life be both a precious , unfathomably beautiful gift , and it be impossible here , on the incarnational side of thing . it be be a very bad match for those of we who be bear extremely sensitive . it be so hard and weird that we sometimes wonder if we be be punke . it be fill simultaneously with heartbreake sweetness and beauty , desperate poverty , flood and baby and acne and mozart , all swirl together . I do not think it be an ideal system .     ( laughter )     number two : almost everything will work again if you unplug it for a few minute —     ( laughter )     ( applause )     include you .     three : there be almost nothing outside of you that will help in any kind of last way , unless you be wait for an organ . you can not buy , achieve or date serenity and peace of mind . this be the most horrible truth , and I so resent it . but it be an inside job , and we can not arrange peace or lasting improvement for the people we love most in the world . they have to find their own way , their own answer . you can not run alongside your grow child with sunscreen and chapstick on their hero 's journey . you have to release they . it be disrespectful not to . and if it be someone else 's problem , you probably do not have the answer , anyway .     ( laughter )     our help be usually not very helpful . our help be often toxic . and help be the sunny side of control . stop help so much . do not get your help and goodness all over everybody .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     this bring we to number four : everyone be screw up , break , clingy and scared , even the people who seem to have it most together . they be much more like you than you would believe , so try not to compare your inside to other people 's outside . it will only make you bad than you already be .     ( laughter )     also , you can not save , fix or rescue any of they or get anyone sober . what help I get clean and sober 30 year ago be the catastrophe of my behavior and thinking . so I ask some sober friend for help , and I turn to a high power . one acronym for god be the " gift of desperation , " g - o - d , or as a sober friend put it , by the end I be deteriorate fast than I could lower my standard .     ( laughter )     so god might mean , in this case , " I run out of any more good idea . "     while fix and save and try to rescue be futile , radical self - care be quantum , and it radiate out from you into the atmosphere like a little fresh air . it be a huge gift to the world . when people respond by say , " well , be not she full of herself , " just smile obliquely like mona lisa and make both of you a nice cup of tea . be full of affection for one 's goofy , self - center , cranky , annoying self be home . it be where world peace begin .     number five : chocolate with 75 percent cacao be not actually a food .     ( laughter )     its good use be as a bait in snake trap or to balance the leg of wobbly chair . it be never mean to be consider an edible .     number six —     ( laughter )     writing . every writer you know write really terrible first draft , but they keep their butt in the chair . that be the secret of life . that be probably the main difference between you and they . they just do it . they do it by prearrangement with themselves . they do it as a debt of honor . they tell story that come through they one day at a time , little by little . when my old brother be in fourth grade , he have a term paper on bird due the next day , and he have not start . so my dad sit down with he with an audubon book , paper , pencil and brad — for those of you who have get a little less young and remember brad — and he say to my brother , " just take it bird by bird , buddy . just read about pelican and then write about pelican in your own voice . and then find out about chickadee , and tell we about they in your own voice . and then geese . "     so the two most important thing about writing be : bird by bird and really god - awful first draft . if you do not know where to start , remember that every single thing that happen to you be yours , and you get to tell it . if people want you to write more warmly about they , they should 've behave well .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     you be go to feel like hell if you wake up someday and you never write the stuff that be tug on the sleeve of your heart : your story , memory , vision and song — your truth , your version of thing — in your own voice . that be you all you have to offer we , and that be also why you be bear .     seven : publication and temporary creative success be something you have to recover from . they kill as many people as not . they will hurt , damage and change you in way you can not imagine . the most degraded and evil people I 've ever know be male writer who 've have huge good seller . and yet , return to number one , that all truth be paradox , it be also a miracle to get your work publish , to get your story read and hear . just try to bust yourself gently of the fantasy that publication will heal you , that it will fill the swiss - cheesy hole inside of you . it can not . it will not . but writing can . so can singe in a choir or a bluegrass band . so can paint community mural or bird or foster old dog that no one else will .     number eight : family . family be hard , hard , hard , no matter how cherished and astonishing they may also be . again , see number one .     ( laughter )     at family gathering where you suddenly feel homicidal or suicidal —     ( laughter )     remember that in all case , it be a miracle that any of we , specifically , be conceive and bear . earth be forgiveness school . it begin with forgive yourself , and then you might as well start at the dinner table . that way , you can do this work in comfortable pant .     ( laughter )     when william blake say that we be here to learn to endure the beam of love , he know that your family would be an intimate part of this , even as you want to run scream for your cute little life . but I promise you be up to it . you can do it , cinderella , you can do it , and you will be amazed .     nine : food . try to do a little well . I think you know what I mean .     ( laughter )     number 10 —     ( laughter )     grace . grace be spiritual wd-40 , or water wing . the mystery of grace be that god love henry kissinger and vladimir putin and I exactly as much as he or she love your new grandchild . go figure .     ( laughter )     the movement of grace be what change we , heal we and heal our world . to summon grace , say , " help , " and then buckle up . grace find you exactly where you be , but it do not leave you where it find you . and grace will not look like casper the friendly ghost , regrettably . but the phone will ring or the mail will come and then against all odd , you 'll get your sense of humor about yourself back . laughter really be carbonated holiness . it help we breathe again and again and give we back to ourselves , and this give we faith in life and each other . and remember — grace always bat last .     eleven : god just mean goodness . it be really not all that scary . it mean the divine or a love , animate intelligence , or , as we learn from the great " deteriorata , " " the cosmic muffin . " a good name for god be : " not I . " emerson say that the happy person on earth be the one who learn from nature the lesson of worship . so go outside a lot and look up . my pastor say you can trap bee on the bottom of mason jar without lid because they do not look up , so they just walk around bitterly bump into the glass wall . go outside . look up . secret of life .     and finally : death . number 12 . wow and yike . it be so hard to bear when the few people you can not live without die . you 'll never get over these loss , and no matter what the culture say , you be not suppose to . we christians like to think of death as a major change of address , but in any case , the person will live again fully in your heart if you do not seal it off . like leonard cohen say , " there be crack in everything , and that be how the light get in . " and that be how we feel our people again fully alive .     also , the people will make you laugh out loud at the most inconvenient time , and that be the great good news . but their absence will also be a lifelong nightmare of homesickness for you . grief and friend , time and tear will heal you to some extent . tear will bathe and baptize and hydrate and moisturize you and the ground on which you walk .     do you know the first thing that god say to moses ? he say , " take off your shoe . " because this be holy ground , all evidence to the contrary . it be hard to believe , but it be the true thing I know . when you be a little bit old , like my tiny personal self , you realize that death be as sacred as birth . and do not worry — get on with your life . almost every single death be easy and gentle with the very good people surround you for as long as you need . you will not be alone . they 'll help you cross over to whatever await we . as ram dass say , " when all be say and do , we be really just all walk each other home . "     I think that be it , but if I think of anything else , I 'll let you know .     thank you .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     I be very surprised to be ask to come , because it be not my realm , technology or design or entertainment . I mean , my realm be sort of faith and writing and kind of lurch along together . and I be surprised , but they say I could give a talk , and I say I would love to .     ( video ) if you do not know where to start , remember that every single thing that happen to you be yours and you get to tell it .     anne lamott : people be very frightened and feel really doom in america these day , and I just want to help people get their sense of humor about it and to realize how much be not a problem . if you take an action , take a really healthy or loving or friendly action , you 'll have love and friendly feeling .  
   I visit the future for a living . not just one future , but many possible future , bring back evidence from those future for you to experience today . like an archaeologist of the future . over the year , my many journey have bring back thing like a new specie of synthetically engineer bee ; a book name , " pet as protein ; " a machine that make you rich by trade your genetic datum ; a lamp power by sugar ; a computer for grow food .     ok , so I do not actually travel to different future — yet . but my husband jon and I spend a lot of time think and create vision of different future in our studio . we be constantly look out for weak signal , those murmur of future potential . then we trace those thread of potential out into the future , ask : what might it feel like to live in this future ? what might we see , hear and even breathe ? then we run experiment , build prototype , make object , bring aspect of these future to life , make they concrete and tangible so you can really feel the impact of those future possibility here and now . but this work be not about prediction . it be about create tool — tool that can help connect our present and our future self so we become active participant in create a future we want — a future that work for all .     so how do we go about do this ? for a recent project call drone aviary , we be interested in explore what it would mean to live with drone in our city . drone that have the power to see thing we can not , to go place we can not and to do so with increase autonomy . but to understand the technology , get our hand dirty be crucial . so we build several different drone in our studio . we give they name , function and then fly they — but not without difficulty . thing come loose , gps signal glitche and drone crash . but it be through such experimentation that we could construct a very concrete and very experiential slice of one possible future .     so now , let us go to that future . let us imagine we be live in a city with drone like this one . we call it the nightwatchman . it patrol the street , often spot in the evening and at night . initially , many of we be annoy by its low , dull hum . but then , like everything else , we got use to it . now , what if you could see the world through its eye ? see how it constantly log every resident of our neighborhood ; log the kid who play football in the no - ballgame area and mark they as statutory nuisance .     ( laughter )     and then see how it disperse this other group , who be teenager , with the threat of an autonomously issue injunction . and then there be this giant float disc call madison . its glaring presence be so overpower , I can not help but stare at it . but if feel like each time I look at it , it know a little more about I — like it keep flash all these brianair advert at I , as if it know about the holiday I be plan . I be not sure if I find this mildly entertaining or just entirely invasive .     back to the present . in create this future , we learn a lot . not just about how these machine work , but what it would feel like to live alongside they . whilst drone like madison and nightwatchman , in these particular form , be not real yet , most element of a drone future be in fact very real today . for instance , facial recognition system be everywhere — in our phone , even in our thermostat and in camera around our city — keep a record of everything we do , whether it be an advertisement we glance at or a protest we attend . these thing be here , and we often do not understand how they work , and what their consequence could be . and we see this all around we . this difficulty in even imagine how the consequence of our action today will affect our future .     last year , where I live , in the uk , there be a referendum where the people could vote for the uk to leave the eu or stay in the eu , popularly know as " brexit . " and soon after the result come out , a word begin to surface call " bregret " —     ( laughter )     describe people who choose to vote for brexit as a protest , but without think through its potential consequence . and this disconnect be evident in some of the simple thing . say you go out for a quick drink . then you decide you would not mind a few more . you know you 'll wake up in the morning feel awful , but you justify it by say , " the other I in the future will deal with that . " but as we find out in the morning , that future " you " be you .     when I be grow up in india in the late ' 70 and early ' 80 , there be a feeling that the future both need to and could actually be plan . I remember my parent have to plan for some of the simple thing . when they want a telephone in our house , they need to order it and then wait — wait for nearly five year before it got instal in our house .     ( laughter )     and then if they want to call my grandparent who live in another city , they need to book something call a " trunk call , " and then wait again , for hour or even day . and then abruptly , the phone would ring at two in the morning , and all of we would jump out of our bed and gather round the phone , shriek into it , discuss general well - being at two in the morning .     today it can feel like thing be happen too fast — so fast , that it can become really difficult for we to form an understanding of our place in history . it create an overwhelming sense of uncertainty and anxiety , and so , we let the future just happen to we . we do not connect with that future " we . " we treat our future self as a stranger , and the future as a foreign land . it be not a foreign land ; it be unfold right in front of we , continually be shape by our action today . we be that future , and so I believe fight for a future we want be more urgent and necessary than ever before .     we have learn in our work that one of the most powerful mean of effect change be when people can directly , tangibly and emotionally experience some of the future consequence of their action today . early this year , the government of the united arab emirates invite we to help they shape their country 's energy you all the way up to 2050 . base on the government 's econometric datum , we create this large city model , and visualize many possible future on it . as I be excitably take a group of government official and member of energy company through one sustainable future on our model , one of the participant tell I , " I can not imagine that in the future people will stop drive car and start use public transport . " and then he say , " there be no way I can tell my own son to stop drive his car . "     but we be prepare for this reaction . work with scientist in a chemistry lab in my home city in india , we have create approximate sample of what the air would be like in 2030 if our behavior stay the same . and so , I walk the group over to this object that emit vapor from those air sample . just one whiff of the noxious polluted air from 2030 bring home the point that no amount of datum can . this be not the future you would want your child to inherit . the next day , the government make a big announcement . they would be invest billion of dollar in renewable . we do not know what part our future experience play in this decision , but we know that they 've change their energy policy to mitigate such a scenario .     while something like air from the future be very effective and tangible , the trajectory from our present to a future consequence be not always so linear . even when a technology be develop with utopian ideal , the moment it leave the laboratory and enter the world , it be subject to force outside of the creator ' control . for one particular project , we investigate medical genomic : the technology of gather and use people 's genetic datum to create personalized medicine . we be ask : what be some of the unintended consequence of link our genetic to health care ? to explore this question far , we create a fictional lawsuit , and bring it to life through 31 piece of carefully craft evidence . so we build an illegal genetic clinic , a diy carbon dioxide incubator , and even buy frozen mouse on ebay .     so now let us go to that future where this lawsuit be unfold , and meet the defendant , arnold mann . arnold be be prosecute by this global giant biotech company call dynamic genetic , because they have evidence that arnold have illegally insert the company 's patent genetic material into his body . how on earth do arnold manage to do that ? well , it all start when arnold be ask to submit a saliva sample in this spit kit to the nhi — the uk 's national health insurance service . when arnold receive his health insurance bill , he be shocked and scare to see that his premium have go through the roof , beyond anything he or his family could ever afford .     the state 's algorithm have scan his genetic datum and find the risk of a chronic health condition lurk in his dna . and so arnold have to start pay toward the potential cost of that future disease — potential future disease from today . in that moment of fear and panic , arnold slip through the city into the dark shadow of this illegal clinic for treatment — a treatment that would modify his dna so that the state 's algorithm would no long see he as a risk , and his insurance premium would become affordable again . but arnold be catch . and the legal proceeding in the case dynamic genetic v. mann begin .     in bring such a future to life , what be important to we be that people could actually touch , see and feel its potential , because such an immediate and close encounter provoke people to ask the right question , question like : what be the implication of live in a world where I be judge on my genetic ? or : who might claim ownership to my genetic datum , and what might they do with it ? if this feel even slightly out - there or farfetche , today there be a little - know bill be pass through the american congress know as hr 1313 , preserve employee wellness program act . this bill propose to amend the genetic information nondiscrimination act , popularly know as gina , and would allow employer to ask about family medical history and genetic datum to all employee for the first time . those who refuse would face large penalty .     in the work I 've show so far , whether it be drone or genetic crime , these story describe troubling future with the intention of help we avoid those future . but what about what we can not avoid ? today , especially with climate change , it look like we be head for trouble . and so what we want to do now be to prepare for that future by develop tool and attitude that can help we find hope — hope that can inspire action .     currently , we be run an experiment in our studio . it be a work in progress . base on climate datum projection , we be explore a future where the western world have move from abundance to scarcity . we imagine live in a future city with repeat flooding , period with almost no food in supermarket , economic instability , break supply chain . what can we do to not just survive , but prosper in such a world ? what food can we eat ?     to really step inside these question , we be build this room in a flat in london from 2050 . it be like a little time capsule that we reclaim from the future . we strip it down to the bare minimum . everything we lovingly put in our home , like flat - panel tv , internet - connect fridge and artisanal furnishing all have to go . and in its place , we be build food computer from abandon , salvage and repurposed material , turn today 's waste into tomorrow 's dinner . for instance , we 've just finish build our first fully automate fogponic machine . it use the technique of fogponic — so just fog as a nutrient , not even water or soil — to grow thing quickly . at the moment , we have successfully grow tomato . but we 'll need more food than what we can grow in this small room . so what else could we forage from the city ? insect ? pigeon ? fox ?     early , we bring back air from the future . this time we be bring an entire room from the future , a room full of hope , tool and tactic to create positive action in hostile condition . spend time in this room , a room that could be our own future home , make the consequence of climate change and food insecurity much more immediate and tangible .     what we be learn through such experiment and our practice and the people we engage with be that create concrete experience can bridge the disconnect between today and tomorrow . by put ourselves into different possible future , by become open and willing to embrace the uncertainty and discomfort that such an act can bring , we have the opportunity to imagine new possibility . we can find optimistic future ; we can find path forward ; we can move beyond hope into action . it mean we have the chance to change direction , a chance to have our voice hear , a chance to write ourselves into a future we want . other world be possible .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I remember when I first find out I be go to speak at a ted conference . I run across the hall to one of my classroom to inform my student .     " guess what , guy ? I 've be ask to give a ted talk . "     the reaction be not one I quite expect . the whole room go silent .     " a ted talk ? you mean , like the one you make we watch on grit ? or the one with the scientist that do this really awesome thing with robot ? " muhammad ask .     " yes , just like that . "     " but coach , those people be really important and smart . "     ( laughter )     " I know that . "     " but coach , why be you speak ? you hate public speak . "     " I do , " I admit , " but it be important that I speak about we , that I speak about your journey , about my journey . people need to know . "     the student at the all - refugee school that I found decide to end with some word of encouragement .     " cool ! it well be good , coach . "     ( laughter )     there be 65.3 million people who have be forcibly displace from their home because of war or persecution . the large number , 11 million , be from syria . 33,952 people flee their home daily . the vast majority remain in refugee camp , whose condition can not be define as humane under anyone 's definition . we be participate in the degradation of human . never have we have number this high . this be the high number of refugee since world war ii .     now , let I tell you why this issue be so important to I . I be an arab . I be an immigrant . I be a muslim . I 've also spend the last 12 year of my life work with refugee . oh — and I be also gay . it make I really popular these day .     ( laughter )     but I be the daughter of a refugee . my grandmother flee syria in 1964 during the first assad regime . she be three month pregnant when she pack up a suitcase , pile in her five child and drive to neighboring jordan , not know what the future hold for she and her family . my grandfather decide to stay , not believe it be that bad . he follow she a month later , after his brother be torture and his factory be take over by the government . they rebuild their life start from scratch and eventually become independently wealthy jordanian citizen .     I be bear in jordan 11 year later . it be really important to my grandmother for we to know our history and our journey . I be eight year old when she take I to visit my first refugee camp . I do not understand why . I do not know why it be so important to she for we to go . I remember walk into the camp hold her hand , and her say , " go play with the kid , " while she visit with the woman in the camp . I do not want to . these kid be not like I . they be poor . they live in a camp . I refuse . she kneel down beside I and firmly say , " go . and do not come back until you 've play . do not ever think people be beneath you or that you have nothing to learn from other . "     I reluctantly go . I never want to disappoint my grandmother . I return a few hour later , having spend some time play soccer with the kid in the camp . we walk out of the camp , and I be excitedly tell she what a great time I have and how fantastic the kid be .     " haram ! " I say in arabic . " poor they . "     " haram on we , " she say , use the word 's different meaning , that we be sin . " do not feel sorry for they ; believe in they . "     it be not until I leave my country of origin for the united states that I realize the impact of her word .     after my college graduation , I apply for and be grant political asylum , base on be a member of a social group . some people may not realize this , but you can still get the death penalty in some country for be gay . I have to give up my jordanian citizenship . that be the hard decision I 've ever have to make , but I have no other choice . the point be , when you find yourself choose between home and survival , the question " where be you from ? " become very loaded . a syrian woman who I recently meet at a refugee camp in greece articulate it well , when she recall the exact moment she realize she have to flee aleppo .     " I look out the window and there be nothing . it be all rubble . there be no store , no street , no school . everything be go . I have be in my apartment for month , listen to bomb drop and watch people die . but I always think it would get well , that no one could force I to leave , no one could take my home away from I . and I do not know why it be that morning , but when I look outside , I realize if I do not leave , my three young child would die . and so we leave . we leave because we have to , not because we want to . there be no choice , " she say .     it be kind of hard to believe that you belong when you do not have a home , when your country of origin reject you because of fear or persecution , or the city that you grow up in be completely destroy . I do not feel like I have a home . I be no long a jordanian citizen , but I be not american , either . I feel a kind of loneliness that be still hard to put into word today .     after college , I desperately need to find a place to call home . I bounce around from state to state and eventually end up in north carolina . kindhearte people who feel sorry for I offer to pay rent or buy I a meal or a suit for my new interview . it just make I feel more isolated and incapable . it be not until I meet miss sarah , a southern baptist who take I in at my low and give I a job , that I start to believe in myself . miss sarah own a diner in the mountain of north carolina . I assume , because of my privileged upbringing and my seven sister education , that she would ask I to manage the restaurant . I be wrong . I start off washing dish , cleaning toilet and work the grill . I be humble ; I be show the value of hard work . but most importantly , I feel value and embrace . I celebrate christmas with her family , and she attempt to observe ramadan with I .     I remember be very nervous about come out to she — after all , she be a southern baptist . I sit on the couch next to she and I say , " miss sarah , you know that I be gay . " her response be one that I will never forget .     " that be fine , honey . just do not be a slut . "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     I eventually move to atlanta , still try to find my home . my journey take a strange turn three year later , after I meet a group of refugee kid play soccer outside . I would make a wrong turn into this apartment complex , and I see these kid outside play soccer . they be play barefoot with a raggedy soccer ball and rock set up as goal . I watch they for about an hour , and after that I be smile . the boy remind I of home . they remind I of the way I grow up play soccer in the street of jordan , with my brother and cousin . I eventually join their game . they be a little skeptical about let I join it , because accord to they , girl do not know how to play . but obviously I do .     I ask they if they have ever play on a team . they say they have not , but that they would love to . I gradually win they over , and we form our first team . this group of kid would give I a crash course in refugee , poverty and humanity . three brother from afghanistan — roohullah , noorullah and zabiullah — play a major role in that . I show up late to practice one day to find the field completely desert . I be really worried . my team love to practice . it be not like they to miss practice . I get out of my car , and two kid run out from behind a dumpster , wave their hand frantically .     " coach , rooh got beat up . he got jump . there be blood everywhere . "     " what do you mean ? what do you mean he got beat up ? "     " these bad kid come and beat he up , coach . everybody leave . they be all scared . "     we hop into my car and drive over to rooh 's apartment . I knock on the door , and noor open it . " where be rooh ? I need to talk to he , see if he be ok . " " he be in his room , coach . he be refuse to come out . " I knock on the door .     " rooh , come on out . I need to talk to you . I need to see if you be ok or if we need to go to the hospital . "     he come out . he have a big gash on his head , a split lip , and he be physically shake . I be look at he , and I ask the boy to call for their mom , because I need to go to the hospital with he . they call for their mom . she come out . I have my back turn to she , and she start scream in farsi . the boy fall to the ground laugh . I be very confused , because there be nothing funny about this . they explain to I that she say ,     " you tell I your coach be a muslim and a woman . " from behind , I do not appear to be either to she .     ( laughter )     " I be muslim , " I say , turn to she . " ašhadu ʾan lā ʾilāha ʾilla ( a)llāh , " recite the muslim declaration of faith . confused , and perhaps maybe a little bit reassure , she realize that yes , I , this american - act , short - wear , non - veiled woman , be indeed a muslim .     their family have flee the taliban . hundred of people in their village be murder . their father be take in by the taliban , only to return a few month later , a shell of the man he once be . the family escape to pakistan , and the two old boy , age eight and 10 at the time , wove rug for 10 hour a day to provide for their family . they be so excited when they find out that they have be approve to resettle in the united states , make they the lucky 0.1 percent who get to do that . they have hit the jackpot .     their story be not unique . every refugee family I have work with have have some version of this . I work with kid who have see their mother rape , their father ' finger slice off . one kid see a bullet put in his grandmother 's head , because she refuse to let the rebel take he to be a child soldier . their journey be haunt . but what I get to see every day be hope , resilience , determination , a love of life and appreciation for be able to rebuild their life .     I be at the boy ' apartment one night , when the mom come home after clean 18 hotel room in one day . she sit down , and noor rub her foot , say that he be go to take care of she once he graduate . she smile from exhaustion . " god be good . life be good . we be lucky to be here . "     in the last two year , we have see an escalate anti - refugee sentiment . it be global . the number continue to grow because we do nothing to prevent it and nothing to stop it . the issue should not be stop refugee from come into our country . the issue should be not force they to leave their own .     ( applause )     sorry .     ( applause )     how much more suffering , how much more suffering must we take ? how many more people need to be force out of their home before we say , " enough ! " ? a hundred million ? not only do we shame , blame and reject they for atrocity that they have absolutely nothing to do with , we re - traumatize they , when we be suppose to be welcome they into our country . we strip they of their dignity and treat they like criminal .     I have a student in my office a couple of week ago . she be originally from iraq . she break down cry .     " why do they hate we ? "     " who hate you ? "     " everyone ; everyone hate we because we be refugee , because we be muslim . "     in the past , I be able to reassure my student that the majority of the world do not hate refugee . but this time I could not . I could not explain to she why someone try to rip off her mother 's hijab when they be grocery shopping , or why a player on an oppose team call she a terrorist and tell she to go back where she come from . I could not reassure she that her father 's ultimate life sacrifice by serve in the united states military as an interpreter would make she more value as an american citizen .     we take in so few refugee worldwide . we resettle less than 0.1 percent . that 0.1 percent benefit we more than they . it dumbfound I how the word " refugee " be consider something to be dirty , something to be ashamed of . they have nothing to be ashamed of .     we have see advance in every aspect of our life — except our humanity . there be 65.3 million people who have be force out of their home because of war — the large number in history . we be the one who should be ashamed .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be a climate scientist , and I hate weather . I have spend too much time in california , and I strongly feel that weather should be optional .     ( laughter )     so I do not want to experience cloud , let alone study they . but cloud seem to follow I wherever I go .     the thing be , cloud be a real challenge for climate science . we do not know how they be go to react as the planet heat up , and hide in that uncertainty might be hope . maybe , just maybe , cloud could slow down global warming , and buy we a little bit more time to get our act together , which would be very convenient right now . I mean , even I could put up with a few more cloudy day if cloud save the planet .     now , we be sure about some thing . carbon dioxide be a greenhouse gas , we be emit a lot of it , and the planet be heat up . case close . but I still go to work every day . it turn out that there be a lot that we do not understand about climate change . in particular , we have not answer what seem to be a very fundamental question . we know it be go to get hot , but we do not know exactly how hot it be go to get . now , this be a really easy question to answer if one of you would like to give I a time machine . but I be go to be honest with you : if I have a time machine , I would not be hang out at this particular point in history . so in order to see the future , we have to rely on the output of computer simulation — climate model , like this one .     now , in my line of work , I encounter many very charming people on the internet who like to tell I that climate model be all wrong . and I would just like to say : no kidding ! seriously ? I get pay to complain about climate model . but we do not want model to be perfect . we want they to be useful . I mean , think about it : a computer simulation that be able to exactly reproduce all of reality . that be not a climate model ; that be " the matrix . " so , model be not crystal ball . they be research tool , and the way in which they be wrong can actually teach we a lot .     for example : different climate model be largely able to capture the warming that we 've see so far . but fast - forward to the end of the century under a business - as - usual scenario , and climate model do not really agree anymore . yeah , they be all warm ; that be just basic physic . but some of they project catastrophe — more than five time the warming we 've see already . and other be literally more chill .     so why do not climate model agree on how warm it be go to get ? well , to a large extent , it be because they do not agree on what cloud will do in the future . and that be because , just like I , computer hate cloud . computer hate cloud because they be simultaneously very large and very small . cloud be form when microscopic water droplet or ice crystal coalesce around tiny particle . but at the same time , they cover two - third of the earth 's surface . in order to really accurately model cloud , we would need to track the behavior of every water droplet and dust grain in the entire atmosphere , and there be no computer powerful enough to do that . so instead , we have to make a trade - off : we can zoom in and get the detail right , but have no idea what be go on worldwide ; or , we could sacrifice realism at small scale in order to see the big picture . now , there be no one right answer , no perfect way to do this , and different climate model make different choice .     now , it be unfortunate that computer struggle with cloud , because cloud be crucially important in regulate the temperature of the planet . in fact , if all the cloud go away , we would experience profound climate change . but without cloud , would it be warm or colder ? the answer be both .     so I be go to be honest with you , I be not a cloud spotter . my favorite type of cloud be none . but even I know that cloud come in all shape and size . low , thick cloud like these be really good at block out the sun and ruin your barbecue , and high , wispy cloud like these cirru largely let that sunlight stream through . every sunny day be the same , but every cloudy day be cloudy in its own way . and it be this diversity that can make the global impact of cloud very hard to understand . so to see this global effect of cloud , it really help to take a selfie .     it will never cease to blow my mind that we can see our planet from outer space , but we can not see all of it . cloud be block the view . that be what they do . these low , thick cloud be extremely effective sunshade . they turn back about 20 percent of everything the sun send we . that be a lot of waste solar power . so , low cloud be powerful sunshade , make the planet cooler . but that be not the only effect of cloud . our planet have a temperature , and like anything with a temperature , it be give off heat . we be radiate thermal energy away into space , and we can see this in the infrared . once again , cloud be block the view . that be because high cloud live in the upper reach of the atmosphere , where it be very cold . and this mean that they lose very little heat to space themselves . but at the same time , they block the heat come up from the planet below . the earth be try to cool itself off , and high cloud be get in the way . the result be a very powerful greenhouse effect . so , cloud play this very large and dual role in the climate system . we 've get low cloud that act like a sunshade , cool the planet , and high cloud which act like a greenhouse , warm the planet .     right now , these two effect — they do not cancel out . that sunshade — it be a little bit more powerful . so if we got rid of all the cloud tomorrow , which , for the record , I be not advocate , our planet would get warm . so clearly , all of the cloud be not go away . but climate change be change . so we can ask : how will global warming change cloud ? but remember , cloud be so important in regulate the earth 's temperature , and they both warm and cool the planet . so even small change to cloud cover could have profound consequence . so we might also ask : how will cloud change global warming ?     and that be where there might be space for hope . if global warming trigger cloud change that make for a less powerful greenhouse or a more effective sunshade , then that would enhance the cool power of cloud . it would act in opposition to global warming , and that be what be happen in those climate model that project relatively mute warming . but climate model struggle with cloud , and this uncertainty — it go both way . cloud could help we out with global warming . they could also make it bad .     now , we know that climate change be happen because we can see it : rise temperature , melting icecap , shift in rainfall pattern . and you might think that we could also see it in the cloud . but here be something else unfortunate : cloud be really hard to see . I see everybody from the pacific northwest be like , " I have some suggestion for you . "     ( laughter )     and you guy , we have try look up .     ( laughter )     but in order to do climate science , we need to see all of the cloud , everywhere , for a very long time . and that be what make it hard . now , nothing see more cloud than a satellite — not even a british person .     ( laughter )     and fortunately , we do have satellite observation of cloud that , like I , date back to the 1980 . but these satellite be design for weather , not climate . they be not in it for the long haul . so to get that long - term trend information , we need to do climate science . we have to stitch together the output of multiple satellite with different viewing angle and orbit and carry different camera equipment . and as a result , there be gap in our knowledge . but even from this very cloudy picture , we be start to get hint of a possible future .     when we look at the observation , one thing jump out at we : the cloud be move . as the planet 's temperature increase , high cloud rise up . they move to the cold upper reach of the atmosphere , and this mean that even as the planet heat up , high cloud do not . they remain at roughly the same temperature . so they be not lose more heat to space . but at the same time , they be trap more heat from the warming planet below . this intensify the greenhouse effect . high cloud be make global warming bad .     cloud be move in other dimension , too . the atmospheric circulation , that large - scale motion of air and water in the atmosphere , be change , and cloud be go with it . on large scale , cloud seem to be move from the tropic toward the pole . it be kind of like your grandparent in reverse . and this matter , because if your job be to block incoming sunlight , you be go to be much more effective in the tropic under that intense tropical sun than you be in high latitude . so if this keep up , this will also make global warming bad . and what we have not find , despite year of look , be any indication of the opposite . there be no observational evidence that cloud will substantially slow down global warming . the earth be not go to break its own fever .     now , there be still uncertainty here . we do not know for sure what the future hold . but we be send our kid there , and they be never come back . I want they to be prepare for what they 'll face , and that be why it be so important to keep our earth - observe satellite up there and to hire diverse and smart and talented people who do not hate cloud to improve the climate model .     but uncertainty be not ignorance . we do not know everything , but we do not know nothing , and we know what carbon dioxide do . I start my career as an astrophysicist , so you can believe I when I say that this be the great place in the universe . other planet might have liquid water . on earth , we have whiskey .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     we be so lucky to live here , but let us not push our luck . I do not think that cloud will save the planet . I think that be probably up to we .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   loneliness . all of we in this room will experience loneliness at some point in our life . loneliness be not a function of be alone , but rather , a function of how socially connect you be to those around you . there could be somebody in this room right now surround by a thousand people experience loneliness . and while loneliness can be attribute to many thing , as an architect , I be go to tell you today how loneliness can be the result of our build environment — the very home we choose to live in .     let us take a look at this house . it be a nice house . there be a big yard , picket fence , two - car garage . and the home might be in a neighborhood like this . and for many people around the globe , this home , this neighborhood — it be a dream . and yet the danger of achieve this dream be a false sense of connection and an increase in social isolation .     I know , I can hear you now , there be somebody in the room scream at I inside their head , " that be my house , and that be my neighborhood , and I know everyone on my block ! " to which I would answer , " terrific ! " and I wish there be more people like you , because I would wager to guess there be more people in the room live in a similar situation that might not know their neighbor . they might recognize they and say hello , but under their breath , they be ask their spouse , " what be their name again ? " so they can ask a question by name to signify they know they .     social medium also contribute to this false sense of connection . this image be you all too familiar . you be stand in the elevator , sit in a cafe , and you look around , and everyone be on their phone . you be not texte or check facebook , but everyone else be , and maybe , like I , you 've be in a situation where you 've make eye contact , smile and say hello , and have that person yank out their earbud and say , " I be sorry , what do you say ? " I find this incredibly isolating .     the concept I would like to share with you today be an antidote to isolation . it be not a new concept . in fact , it be an age - old way of living , and it still exist in many non - european culture around the world . and about 50 year ago , the dane decide to make up a new name , and since then , ten of thousand of danish people have be live in this connected way . and it be be pursue more widely around the globe as people be seek community . this concept be cohouse .     cohousing be an intentional neighborhood where people know each other and look after one another . in cohousing , you have your own home , but you also share significant space , both indoor and out . before I show you some picture of cohousing , I would like to first introduce you to my friend sheila and spencer . when I first meet sheila and spencer , they be just enter their 60 , and spencer be look ahead at the end of a long career in elementary education . and he really dislike the idea that he might not have child in his life upon retirement . they be now my neighbor . we live in a cohouse community that I not only design , but develop and have my architecture practice in . this community be very intentional about our social interaction .     so let I take you on a tour . from the outside , we look like any other small apartment building . in fact , we look identical to the one next door , except that we be bright yellow . inside , the home be fairly conventional . we all have live room and kitchen , bedroom and bath , and there be nine of these home around a central courtyard . this one 's mine , and this one be spencer and sheila 's . the thing that make this building uniquely cohouse be not the home , but rather , what happen here — the social interaction that happen in and around that central courtyard . when I look across the courtyard , I look forward to see spencer and sheila . in fact , every morning , this be what I see , spencer wave at I furiously as we be make our breakfast .     from our home , we look down into the courtyard , and depend on the time of year , we see this : kid and grownup in various combination play and hang out with each other . there be a lot of giggle and chatter . there be a lot of hula - hooping . and every now and then , " hey , quit hit I ! " or a cry from one of the kid . these be the sound of our daily life , and the sound of social connectedness . at the bottom of the courtyard , there be a set of double door , and those lead into the common house .     I consider the common house the secret sauce of cohousing . it be the secret sauce because it be the place where the social interaction and community life begin , and from there , it radiate out through the rest of the community . inside our common house , we have a large dining room to seat all 28 of we and our guest , and we dine together three time a week . in support of those meal , we have a large kitchen so that we can take turn cook for each other in team of three . so that mean , with 17 adult , I lead cook once every six week . two other time , I show up and help my team with the preparation and cleanup . and all those other night , I just show up . I have dinner , talk with my neighbor , and I go home , having be feed a delicious meal by someone who care about my vegetarian preference .     our nine family have intentionally choose an alternative way of living . instead of pursue the american dream , where we might have be isolate in our single - family home , we instead choose cohouse , so that we can increase our social connection . and that be how cohousing start : with a share intention to live collaboratively . and intention be the single most important characteristic that differentiate cohouse from any other housing model . and while intention be difficult to see or even show , I be an architect , and I can not help but show you more picture .     so here be a few example to illustrate how intention have be express in some of the community I 've visit . through the careful selection of furniture , lighting and acoustic material to support eat together ; in the careful visual location and visual access to kid ' play area around and inside the common house ; in the consideration of scale and distribution of social gathering node in and around the community to support our daily life , all of these space help contribute to and elevate the sense of communita in each community .     what be that word ? " communita . " communita be a fancy social science way of say " spirit of community . " and in visit over 80 different community , my measure of communita become : how frequently do resident eat together ? while it be completely up to each group how frequently they have common meal , I know some that have eat together every single night for the past 40 year . I know other that have an occasional potluck once or twice a month . and from my observation , I can tell you , those that eat together more frequently , exhibit high level of communita . it turn out , when you eat together , you start plan more activity together . when you eat together , you share more thing . you start to watch each other 's kid . you lend our your power tool . you borrow each other 's car .     and despite all this , as my daughter love to say , everything be not rainbow and unicorn in cohousing , and I be not good friend with every single person in my community . we even have difference and conflict . but live in cohousing , we be intentional about our relationship . we be motivated to resolve our difference . we follow up , we check in , we speak our personal truth and , when appropriate , we apologize .     skeptic will say that cohousing be only interesting or attractive to a very small group of people . and I 'll agree with that . if you look at western culture around the globe , those live in cohousing be just a fractional percent . but that need to change , because our very life depend upon it .     in 2015 , brigham young university complete a study that show a significant increase risk of premature death in those who be live in isolation . the us surgeon general have declare isolation to be a public health epidemic . and this epidemic be not restrict to the we alone .     so when I say early that cohousing be an antidote to isolation , what I should have say be that cohousing can save your life . if I be a doctor , I would tell you to take two aspirin , and call I in the morning . but as an architect , I be go to suggest that you take a walk with your neighbor , share a meal together , and call I in 20 year .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   the first time I cry underwater be in 2008 , the island of curaçao , way down in the southern caribbean . it be beautiful there . I be study these coral for my phd , and after day and day of diving on the same reef , I have get to know they as individual . I have make friend with coral colony — totally a normal thing to do . then , hurricane omar smash they apart and rip off their skin , leave little bit of wound tissue that would have a hard time healing , and big patch of dead skeleton that would get overgrown by algae . when I see this damage for the first time , stretch all the way down the reef , I sink onto the sand in my scuba gear and I cry . if a coral could die that fast , how could a reef ever survive ? and why be I make it my job to try to fight for they ?     I never hear another scientist tell that kind of story until last year . a scientist in guam write , " I cry right into my mask , " see the damage on the reef . then a scientist in australia write , " I show my student the result of our coral survey , and we weep . " cry about coral be have a moment , guy .     ( laughter )     and that be because reef in the pacific be lose coral fast than we 've ever see before . because of climate change , the water be so hot for so long in the summer , that these animal can not function normally . they be spit out the colored algae that live in their skin , and the clear bleached tissue that be leave usually starve to death and then rot away . then the skeleton be overgrown by algae .     this be happen over an unbelievable scale . the northern great barrier reef lose two - third of its coral last year over a distance of hundred of mile , then bleach again this year , and the bleaching stretch far south . reef in the pacific be in a nosedive right now , and no one know how bad it be go to get , except ... over in the caribbean where I work , we 've already be through the nosedive . reef there have suffer through century of intense human abuse . we kind of already know how the story go . and we might be able to help predict what happen next .     let us consult a graph . since the invention of scuba , scientist have measure the amount of coral on the seafloor , and how it be change through time . and after century of ratchet human pressure , caribbean reefs meet one of three fate . some reef lose their coral very quickly . some reef lose their coral more slowly , but kind of end up in the same place . ok , so far this be not go very well . but some reef in the caribbean — the one well protect and the one a little far from human — they manage to hold onto their coral . give we a challenge . and , we almost never see a reef hit zero .     the second time I cry underwater be on the north shore of curaçao , 2011 . it be the calm day of the year , but it be always pretty sketchy diving there . my boyfriend and I swam against the wave . I watch my compass so we could find our way back out , and he watch for shark , and after 20 minute of swimming that feel like an hour , we finally drop down to the reef , and I be so shocked , and I be so happy that my eye fill with tear . there be coral 1,000 year old line up one after another . they have survive the entire history of european colonialism in the caribbean , and for century before that .     I never know what a coral could do when it be give a chance to thrive . the truth be that even as we lose so many coral , even as we go through this massive coral die - off , some reef will survive . some will be rag on the edge , some will be beautiful . and by protect shoreline and give we food to eat and support tourism , they will still be worth billion and billion of dollar a year . the good time to protect a reef be 50 year ago , but the second - good time be right now . even as we go through bleach event , more frequent and in more place , some coral will be able to recover .     we have a bleaching event in 2010 in the caribbean that take off big patch of skin on boulder coral like these . this coral lose half of its skin . but if you look at the side of this coral a few year later , this coral be actually healthy again . it be do what a healthy coral do . it be make copy of its polyp , it be fight back the algae and it be reclaim its territory . if a few polyp survive , a coral can regrow ; it just need time and protection and a reasonable temperature . some coral can regrow in 10 year — other take a lot long . but the more stress we take off they locally — thing like overfishing , sewage pollution , fertilizer pollution , dredging , coastal construction — the well they can hang on as we stabilize the climate , and the fast they can regrow .     and as we go through the long , tough and necessary process of stabilize the climate of planet earth , some new coral will still be bear . this be what I study in my research . we try to understand how coral make baby , and how those baby find their way to the reef , and we invent new method to help they survive those early , fragile life stage . one of my favorite coral baby of all time show up right after hurricane omar . it be the same specie I be study before the storm , but you almost never see baby of this specie — it be really rare . this be actually an endangered specie . in this photo , this little baby coral , this little circle of polyp , be a few year old . like its cousin that bleach , it be fight back the algae . and like its cousin on the north shore , it be aim to live for 1,000 year .     what be happen in the world and in the ocean have change our time horizon . we can be incredibly pessimistic on the short term , and mourn what we lose and what we really take for grant . but we can still be optimistic on the long term , and we can still be ambitious about what we fight for and what we expect from our government , from our planet . coral have be live on planet earth for hundred of million of year . they survive the extinction of the dinosaur . they be badasse .     ( laughter )     an individual coral can go through tremendous trauma and fully recover if it be give a chance and it be give protection . coral have always be play the long game , and now so be we .     thank very much .     ( applause )  
   what be one thing that every person in this room be go to become ? old . and most of we be scared stiff at the prospect . how do that word make you feel ? I use to feel the same way . what be I most worried about ? end up drool in some grim institutional hallway . and then I learn that only four percent of old americans be live in nursing home , and the percentage be drop . what else be I worried about ? dementia . turn out that most of we can think just fine to the end . dementia rate be drop , too . the real epidemic be anxiety over memory loss .     ( laughter )     I also figure that old people be depressed because they be old and they be go to die soon .     ( laughter )     it turn out that the long people live , the less they fear die , and that people be happy at the beginning and the end of their life . it be call the u - curve of happiness , and it be be bear out by dozen of study around the world . you do not have to be a buddhist or a billionaire . the curve be a function of the way age itself affect the brain .     so I start feel a lot well about get old , and I start obsess about why so few people know these thing . the reason be ageism : discrimination and stereotype on the basis of age . we experience it anytime someone assume we be too old for something , instead of find out who we be and what we be capable of , or too young . ageism cut both way . all -ism be socially construct idea — racism , sexism , homophobia — and that mean we make they up , and they can change over time . all these prejudice pit we against each other to maintain the status quo , like auto worker in the us compete against auto worker in mexico instead of organize for well wage .     ( applause )     we know it be not ok to allocate resource by race or by sex . why should it be ok to weigh the need of the young against the old ? all prejudice rely on " othere " — see a group of people as other than ourselves : other race , other religion , other nationality . the strange thing about ageism : that other be we . ageism feed on denial — our reluctance to acknowledge that we be go to become that old person . it be denial when we try to pass for young or when we believe in anti - age product , or when we feel like our body be betray we , simply because they be change . why on earth do we stop celebrate the ability to adapt and grow as we move through life ? why should age well mean struggle to look and move like young version of ourselves ? it be embarrassing to be call out as old until we quit be embarrassed about it , and it be not healthy to go through life dread our future . the soon we get off this hamster wheel of age denial , the well off we be .     stereotype be always a mistake , of course , but especially when it come to age , because the long we live , the more different from one another we become . right ? think about it . and yet , we tend to think of everyone in a retirement home as the same age : old —     ( laughter )     when they can span four decade . can you imagine think that way about a group of people between the age of 20 and 60 ?     when you get to a party , do you head for people your own age ? have you ever grumble about entitle millennial ? have you ever reject a haircut or a relationship or an outing because it be not age - appropriate ? for adult , there be no such thing . all these behavior be ageist . we all do they , and we can not challenge bias unless we be aware of it . nobody 's bear ageist , but it start at early childhood , around the same time attitude towards race and gender start to form , because negative message about late life bombard we from the medium and popular culture at every turn . right ? wrinkle be ugly . old people be pathetic . it be sad to be old .     look at hollywood . a survey of recent good picture nomination find that only 12 percent of speak or name character be age 60 and up , and many of they be portray as impaired . old people can be the most ageist of all , because we 've have a lifetime to internalize these message and we 've never think to challenge they . I have to acknowledge it and stop collude . " senior moment " quip , for example : I stop make they when it dawn on I that when I lose the car key in high school , I do not call it a " junior moment . "     ( laughter )     I stop blame my sore knee on be 64 . my other knee do not hurt , and it be just as old .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     we be all worried about some aspect of get old , whether run out of money , get sick , end up alone , and those fear be legitimate and real . but what never dawn on most of we be that the experience of reach old age can be well or bad depend on the culture in which it take place . it be not have a vagina that make life hard for woman . it be sexism .     ( applause )     it be not love a man that make life hard for gay guy . it be homophobia . and it be not the passage of time that make get old so much hard than it have to be . it be ageism . when label be hard to read or there be no handrail or we can not open the damn jar , we blame ourselves , our failure to age successfully , instead of the ageism that make those natural transition shameful and the discrimination that make those barrier acceptable . you can not make money off satisfaction , but shame and fear create market , and capitalism always need new market . who say wrinkle be ugly ? the multi - billion - dollar skin care industry . who say perimenopause and low t and mild cognitive impairment be medical condition ? the trillion - dollar pharmaceutical industry .     ( cheers )     the more clearly we see these force at work , the easy it be to come up with alternative , more positive and more accurate narrative . aging be not a problem to be fix or a disease to be cure . it be a natural , powerful , lifelong process that unite we all .     change the culture be a tall order , I know that , but culture be fluid . look at how much the position of woman have change in my lifetime or the incredible stride that the gay right movement have make in just a few decade , right ?     ( applause )     look at gender . we use to think of it as a binary , male or female , and now we understand it be a spectrum . it be high time to ditch the old - young binary , too . there be no line in the sand between old and young , after which it be all downhill . and the long we wait to challenge that idea , the more damage it do to ourselves and our place in the world , like in the workforce , where age discrimination be rampant . in silicon valley , engineer be getting botoxe and hair - plug before key interview — and these be skilled white man in their 30 , so imagine the effect far down the food chain .     ( laughter )     the personal and economic consequence be devastating . not one stereotype about old worker hold up under scrutiny . company be not adaptable and creative because their employee be young ; they be adaptable and creative despite it . company —     ( laughter )     ( applause )     we know that diverse company be not just well place to work ; they work well . and just like race and sex , age be a criterion for diversity .     a grow body of fascinating research show that attitude towards aging affect how our mind and body function at the cellular level . when we talk to old people like this ( speak more loudly ) or call they " sweetie " or " young lady " — it be call elderspeak — they appear to instantly age , walk and talk less competently . people with more positive feeling towards age walk fast , they do well on memory test , they heal quick , and they live long . even with brain full of plaque and tangle , some people stay sharp to the end . what do they have in common ? a sense of purpose . and what be the big obstacle to have a sense of purpose in late life ? a culture that tell we that get old mean shuffle offstage . that be why the world health organization be develop a global anti - ageism initiative to extend not just life span but health span .     woman experience the double whammy of ageism and sexism , so we experience age differently . there be a double standard at work here — shocker —     ( laughter )     the notion that age enhance man and devalue woman . woman reinforce this double standard when we compete to stay young , another punishing and lose proposition . do any woman in this room really believe that she be a less version — less interesting , less fun in bed , less valuable — than the woman she once be ? this discrimination affect our health , our well - being and our income , and the effect add up over time . they be far compound by race and by class , which be why , everywhere in the world , the poor of the poor be old woman of color .     what be the takeaway from that map ? by 2050 , one out of five of we , almost two billion people , will be age 60 and up . longevity be a fundamental hallmark of human progress . all these old people represent a vast unprecedented and untapped market . and yet , capitalism and urbanization have propel age bias into every corner of the globe , from switzerland , where elder fare the good , to afghanistan , which sit at the bottom of the global agewatch index . half of the world 's country be not mention on that list because we do not bother to collect datum on million of people because they be no long young . almost two - third of people over 60 around the world say they have trouble accessing healthcare . almost three - quarter say their income do not cover basic service like food , water , electricity , and decent housing . be this the world we want our child , who may well live to be a hundred , to inherit ? everyone — all age , all gender , all nationality — be old or future - old , and unless we put an end to it , ageism will oppress we all . and that make it a perfect target for collective advocacy .     why add another -ism to the list when so many , racism in particular , call out for action ? here be the thing : we do not have to choose . when we make the world a well place to grow old in , we make it a well place in which to be from somewhere else , to have a disability , to be queer , to be non - rich , to be non - white . and when we show up at all age for whatever cause matter most to we — save the whale , save the democracy — we not only make that effort more effective , we dismantle ageism in the process .     longevity be here to stay . a movement to end ageism be underway . I be in it , and I hope you will join I .     ( applause and cheer )     thank you . let us do it ! let us do it !     ( applause )  
   I want you to touch your face . go on . what do you feel ? soft ? squishy ? it be you , right ? you be feel you ? well , it be not quite true . you be actually feel thousand of microscopic creature that live on our face and finger . you be feel some of the fungi that drift down from the air duct today . they set off our allergy and smell of mildew . you be feel some of the 100 billion bacterial cell that live on our skin . they 've be munch away at your skin oil and replicate , produce the smell of body odor . you be likely even touch the fecal bacteria that spray onto you the last time you flush a toilet , or those bacteria that live in our water pipe and spray onto you with your last shower . sorry .     ( laughter )     you be probably even give a microscopic high five to the two specie of mite that live on our face , on all of our face . they 've spend the night squirm across your face and have sex on the bridge of your nose .     ( laughter )     many of they be now leak their gut content onto your pore .     ( laughter )     now look at your finger . how be it feel ? gross ? in desperate need of soap or bleach ? that be how you feel now , but it be not go to be how you feel in the future .     for the last 100 year , we 've have an adversarial relationship with the microscopic life near we . if I tell you there be a bug in your house or bacteria in your sink , there be a human - devise solution for that , a product to eradicate , exterminate , disinfect . we strive to remove most of the microscopic life in our world now . but in do so , we be ignore the good source of new technology on this planet . the last 100 year have feature human solution to microbial problem , but the next 100 year will feature microbial solution to human problem .     I be a scientist , and I work with researcher at north carolina state university and the university of colorado to uncover the microscopic life that be nearest we , and that be often in our most intimate and boring environment , be it under our couch , in our backyard , or in our belly button . I do this work because it turn out that we know very little about the microscopic life that be near we . as of a few year ago , no scientist could tell you what bug or microorganism live in your home — your home , the place you know well than anywhere else .     and so I and team of other be arm with q - tip and tweezer and advanced dna technique to uncover the microscopic life near we . in do so , we find over 600 specie of bug that live in usa home , everything from spider and cockroach to tiny mite that cling to feather . and we find over 100,000 specie of bacteria and fungus that live in our dust bunny , thousand more that live on our clothe or in our shower . we 've go far still , and we look at the microorganism that live inside the body of each of those bug in our home . in each bug , for example , a wasp , we see a microscopic jungle unfold in a petri plate , a world of hundred of vibrant specie . behold the biological cosmo ! so many of the specie you be look at right now do not yet have name . most of the life around we remain unknown .     I remember the first time I discover and get to name a new specie . it be a fungus that live in the nest of a paper wasp . it be white and fluffy , and I name it " mucor nidicola , " meaning in latin that it live in the nest of another . this be a picture of it grow on a dinosaur , because everyone think dinosaur be cool . at the time , I be in graduate school , and I be so excited that I have find this new life form . I call up my dad , and I go , " dad ! I just discover a new microorganism specie . " and he laugh and he go , " that be great . I hope you also discover a cure for it . "     ( laughter )     " cure it . "     now , my dad be my big fan , so in that crush moment where he want to kill my new little life form , I realize that actually I have fail he , both as a daughter and a scientist . in my year toil away in lab and in people 's backyard , investigate and catalog the microscopic life around we , I would never make clear my true mission to he . my goal be not to find technology to kill the new microscopic life around we . my goal be to find new technology from this life , that will help save we .     the diversity of life in our home be more than a list of 100,000 new specie . it be 100,000 new source of solution to human problem . I know it be hard to believe that anything that be so small or only have one cell can do anything powerful , but they can . these creature be microscopic alchemist , with the ability to transform their environment with an arsenal of chemical tool . this mean that they can live anywhere on this planet , and they can eat whatever food be around they . this mean they can eat everything from toxic waste to plastic , and they can produce waste product like oil and battery power and even tiny nugget of real gold . they can transform the inedible into nutritive . they can make sugar into alcohol . they give chocolate its flavor , and soil the power to grow .     I be here to tell you that the next 100 year will feature these microscopic creature solve more of our problem . and we have a lot of problem to choose from . we 've get the mundane : bad - smell clothe or bland food . and we 've get the monumental : disease , pollution , war . and so this be my mission : to not just catalog the microscopic life around we , but to find out what it be uniquely well - suited to help we with .     here be an example . we start with a pest , a wasp that live on many of our home . inside that wasp , we pluck out a little - know microorganism specie with a unique ability : it could make beer . this be a trait that only a few specie on this planet have . in fact , all commercially produce beer you 've ever have likely come from one of only three microorganism specie . yet our specie , it could make a beer that taste like honey , and it could also make a delightfully tart beer . in fact , this microorganism specie that live in the belly of a wasp , it could make a valuable sour beer well than any other specie on this planet . there be now four specie that produce commercial beer . where you use to see a pest , now think of taste your future favorite beer .     as a second example , I work with researcher to dig in the dirt in people 's backyard . there , we uncover a microorganism that could make novel antibiotic , antibiotic that can kill the world 's bad superbug . this be an awesome thing to find , but here be the secret : for the last 60 year , most of the antibiotic on the market have come from similar soil bacteria . every day , you and I and everyone in this room and on this planet , be save by similar soil bacteria that produce most of our antibiotic . where you use to see dirt , now think of medication .     perhaps my favorite example come from colleague who be study a pond scum microorganism , which be tragically name after the cow dung it be first find in . it be pretty unremarkable and would be unworthy of discussion , except that the researcher find that if you feed it to mouse , it vaccinate against ptsd . it vaccinate against fear . where you use to see pond scum , now think of hope .     there be so many more microbial example that I do not have time to talk about today . I give you example of solution that come from just three specie , but imagine what those other 100,000 specie in your dust bunny might be able to do . in the future , they might be able to make you sexy or smart or perhaps live long .     so I want you to look at your finger again . think about all those microscopic creature that be unknown . think about in the future what they might be able to do or make or whose life they might be able to save . how do your finger feel right now ? a little bit powerful ? that be because you be feel the future .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   my son and the iphone be bear three week apart in june 2007 . so while those early adopter be line up outside , wait to get their hand on this amazing new gadget , I be stick at home with my hand full of something else that be send out constant notification —     ( laughter )     a miserable , colicky baby who would only sleep in a move stroller with complete silence . I literally be walk 10 to 15 mile a day , and the baby weight come off . that part be great .     but man , be I bored . before motherhood , I have be a journalist who rush off when the concorde crash . I be one of the first people into belgrade when there be a revolution in serbia . now , I be exhaust . this walking go on for week . it be only until about three month in that something shift , though . as I pound the pavement , my mind start to wander , too . I begin imagine what I would do when I finally do sleep again .     so the colic do fade , and I finally get an iphone and I put all those hour of wander into action . I create my dream job host a public radio show . so there be no more rush off to war zone , but thank to my new smartphone , I could be a mother and a journalist . I could be on the playground and on twitter at the same time . yeah , well , when I think that , when the technology come in and take over , that be when I hit a wall .     so , I want you to picture this : you host a podcast , and you have to prove that the investment of precious public radio dollar in you be worth it . my goal be to increase my audience size tenfold . so one day , I sit down to brainstorm , as you do , and I come up barren . this be different than writer 's block , right ? it be not like there be something there wait to be unearth . there be just nothing . and so I start to think back : when be the last time I actually have a good idea ? yeah , it be when I be push that damn stroller . now all the crack in my day be fill with phone time . I check the headline while I wait for my latte . I update my calendar while I be sit on the couch . texting turn every spare moment into a chance to show to my coworker and my dear husband what a responsive person I be , or at least it be a chance to find another perfect couch for my page on pinterest . I realize that I be never bored . and anyway , do not only bore people get bored ?     but then I start to wonder : what actually happen to we when we get bored ? or , more importantly : what happen to we if we never get bored ? and what could happen if we got rid of this human emotion entirely ? I start talk to neuroscientist and cognitive psychologist , and what they tell I be fascinating . it turn out that when you get bored , you ignite a network in your brain call the " default mode . " so our body , it go on autopilot while we be fold the laundry or we be walk to work , but actually that be when our brain get really busy . here 's boredom researcher dr . sandi mann .     ( audio ) dr . sandi mann : once you start daydream and allow your mind to really wander , you start think a little bit beyond the conscious , a little bit into the subconscious , which allow sort of different connection to take place . it be really awesome , actually .     manoush zomorodi : totally awesome , right ?     so this be my brain in an fmri , and I learn that in the default mode be when we connect disparate idea , we solve some of our most nagging problem , and we do something call " autobiographical planning . " this be when we look back at our life , we take note of the big moment , we create a personal narrative , and then we set goal and we figure out what step we need to take to reach they . but now we chill out on the couch also while update a google doc or reply to email . we call it " get shit do , " but here be what neuroscientist dr . daniel levitin say we be actually do .     ( audio ) dr . daniel levitin : every time you shift your attention from one thing to another , the brain have to engage a neurochemical switch that use up nutrient in the brain to accomplish that . so if you be attempt to multitask , you know , do four or five thing at once , you be not actually do four or five thing at once , because the brain do not work that way . instead , you be rapidly shift from one thing to the next , deplete neural resource as you go .     ( audio ) mz : so switch , switch , switch , you be use glucose , glucose , glucose .     ( audio ) dl : exactly right , and we have a limited supply of that stuff .     mz : a decade ago , we shift our attention at work every three minute . now we do it every 45 second , and we do it all day long . the average person check email 74 time a day , and switch task on their computer 566 time a day . I discover all this talk to professor of informatic , dr . gloria mark .     ( audio ) dr . gloria mark : so we find that when people be stress , they tend to shift their attention more rapidly . we also find , strangely enough , that the short the amount of sleep that a person get , the more likely they be to check facebook . so we be in this vicious , habitual cycle .     mz : but could this cycle be break ? what would happen if we break this vicious cycle ? maybe my listener could help I find out . what if we reclaim those crack in our day ? could it help we jump - start our creativity ? we call the project " bored and brilliant . " and I expect , you know , a couple hundred people to play along , but thousand of people start sign up . and they tell I the reason they be do it be because they be worried that their relationship with their phone have grow kind of ... " codependent , " shall we say .     ( audio ) man : the relationship between a baby and its teddy bear or a baby and its binky or a baby that want its mother 's cradle when it be do with be hold by a stranger —     ( laughs )     that be the relationship between I and my phone .     ( audio ) woman : I think of my phone like a power tool : extremely useful , but dangerous if I be not handle it properly .     ( audio ) woman 2 : if I do not pay close attention , I 'll suddenly realize that I 've lose an hour of time do something totally mindless .     mz : ok , but to really measure any improvement , we need datum , right ? because that be what we do these day . so we partner with some app that would measure how much time we be spend every day on our phone . if you be think it be ironic that I ask people to download another app so that they would spend less time on their phone : yeah , but you got to meet people where they be .     ( laughter )     so before challenge week , we be average two hour a day on our phone and 60 pickup , you know , like , a quick check , do I get a new email ? here be what tina , a student at bard college , discover about herself .     ( audio ) tina : so far , I 've be spend between 150 and 200 minute on my phone per day , and I 've be pick up my phone 70 to 100 time per day . and it be really concern , because that be so much time that I could have spend do something more productive , more creative , more towards myself , because when I be on my phone , I be not do anything important .     mz : like tina , people be start to observe their own behavior . they be get ready for challenge week . and that monday , they start to wake up to instruction in their inbox , an experiment to try .     day one : " put it in your pocket . " take that phone out of your hand . see if you can eliminate the reflex to check it all day long , just for a day . and if this sound easy , you have not try it . here 's listener amanda itzko .     ( audio ) amanda itzko : I be absolutely itching . I feel a little bit crazy , because I have notice that I pick up my phone when I be just walk from one room to another , get on the elevator , and even — and this be the part that I be really embarrassed to actually say out loud — in the car .     mz : yike . yeah , well , but as amanda learn , this itching feeling be not actually her fault . that be exactly the behavior that the technology be build to trigger .     ( laughter )     I mean , right ? here be former google designer , tristan harris .     ( audio ) tristan harris : if I be facebook or I be netflix or I be snapchat , I have literally a thousand engineer whose job be to get more attention from you . I be very good at this , and I do not want you to ever stop . and you know , the ceo of netflix recently say , " our big competitor be facebook , youtube and sleep . " I mean , so there be a million place to spend your attention , but there be a war go on to get it .     mz : I mean , you know the feeling : that amazing episode of " transparent " end , and then the next one start play so you be like , eh , ok fine , I 'll just stay up and watch it . or the linkedin progress bar say you be this close to have the perfect profile , so you add a little more personal information . as one ux designer tell I , the only people who refer to their customer as " user " be drug dealer and technologist .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     and user , as we know , be worth a lot of money . here be former facebook product manager and author , antonio garcía martínez .     ( audio ) antonio garcía martínez : the saying be , if any product be free then you be the product ; your attention be the product . but what be your attention worth ? that be why literally every time you load a page , not just on facebook or any app , there be an auction be hold instantly , billion of time a day , for exactly how much that one ad impression cost .     mz : by the way , the average person will spend two year of their life on facebook . so , back to challenge week . immediately , we see some creativity kick in . here be new yorker lisa alpert .     ( audio ) lisa alpert : I be bored , I guess . so I suddenly look at the stairway that go up to the top of the station , and I think , you know , I have just come down that stairway , but I could go back up and then come back down and get a little cardio . so I do , and then I have a little more time , so I do it again and I do it again , and I do it 10 time . and I have a complete cardio workout . I get on that r train feeling kind of exhausted , but , like , wow , that have never occur to I . how be that possible ?     ( laughter )     mz : so creativity , I learn , mean different thing to different people .     ( laughter )     but everyone find day three 's challenge the hard . it be call " delete that app . " take that app — you know the one ; that one that always get you , it suck you in — take it off your phone , even if just for the day . I delete the game two dot and nearly cry .     ( laughter )     yeah , two dot player know what I be talk about . but my misery have good company .     ( audio ) man 2 : this be liam in los angeles , and I delete twitter , facebook , instagram , tumblr , snapchat and vine from my phone in one fell swoop . and it be kind of an embarrassingly emotional experience at first . it feel weirdly lonely to look at that lock screen with no new notification on it . but I really like decide for myself when to think about or access my social network , not give my phone the power to decide that for I . so thank you .     ( audio ) woman 3 : delete the twitter app be very sad , and I feel I maybe , over the last year when I 've be on twitter , have develop an addiction to it , and this " bored and brilliant " challenge have really make I realize it . after a brief period of really horrible withdrawal feeling , like lack - of - caffeine headache , I now feel lovely . I have a lovely dinner with my family , and I hope to continue this structured use of these powerful tool .     ( audio ) woman 4 : I do not have that guilty gut feeling I have when I know I be waste time on my phone . maybe I 'll have to start give myself challenge and reminder like this every morning .     mz : I mean , yes , this be progress . I could not wait to see what the number say at the end of that week . but when the datum come in , it turn out that we have cut down , on average , just six minute — from 120 minute a day on our phone to 114 . yeah . whoop - de - do .     so I go back to the scientist feel kind of low , and they just laugh at I , and they say , you know , change people 's behavior in such a short time period be ridiculously ambitious , and actually what you 've achieve be far beyond what we think possible . because more important than the number , be the people 's story . they feel empower . their phone have be transform from taskmaster back into tool .     and actually , I find what the young people say most intriguing . some of they tell I that they do not recognize some of the emotion that they feel during challenge week , because , if you think about it , if you have never know life without connectivity , you may never have experience boredom . and there could be consequence . researcher at usc have find — they be study teenager who be on social medium while they be talk to their friend or they be do homework , and two year down the road , they be less creative and imaginative about their own personal future and about solve societal problem , like violence in their neighborhood . and we really need this next generation to be able to focus on some big problem : climate change , economic disparity , massive cultural difference . no wonder ceo in an ibm survey identify creativity as the number one leadership competency .     ok , here be the good news , though : in the end , 20,000 people do " bored and brilliant " that week . ninety percent cut down on their minute . seventy percent get more time to think . people tell I that they sleep well . they feel happy . my favorite note be from a guy who say he feel like he be wake up from a mental hibernation .     some personal datum and some neuroscience give we permission to be offline a little bit more , and a little bit of boredom give we some clarity and help some of we set some goal . I mean , maybe constant connectivity will not be cool in a couple of year . but meanwhile , teach people , especially kid , how to use technology to improve their life and to self - regulate need to be part of digital literacy .     so the next time you go to check your phone , remember that if you do not decide how you be go to use the technology , the platform will decide for you . and ask yourself : what be I really look for ? because if it be to check email , that be fine — do it and be do . but if it be to distract yourself from do the hard work that come with deep thinking , take a break , stare out the window and know that by do nothing you be actually be your most productive and creative self . it might feel weird and uncomfortable at first , but boredom truly can lead to brilliance .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   here be an intriguing fact . in the develop world , everywhere , woman live an average of six to eight year long than man do . six to eight year long . that be , like , a huge gap . in 2015 , the " lancet " publish an article show that man in rich country be twice as likely to die as woman be at any age .     but there be one place in the world where man live as long as woman . it be a remote , mountainous zone , a blue zone , where super longevity be common to both sex . this be the blue zone in sardinia , an italian island in the mediterranean , between corsica and tunisia , where there be six time as many centenarian as on the italian mainland , less than 200 mile away . there be 10 time as many centenarian as there be in north america . it be the only place where man live as long as woman .     but why ? my curiosity be pique . I decide to research the science and the habit of the place , and I start with the genetic profile . I discover soon enough that gene account for just 25 percent of their longevity . the other 75 percent be lifestyle .     so what do it take to live to 100 or beyond ? what be they do right ? what you be look at be an aerial view of villagrande . it be a village at the epicenter of the blue zone where I go to investigate this , and as you can see , architectural beauty be not its main virtue , density be : tightly space house , interwoven alley and street . it mean that the villager ' life constantly intersect . and as I walk through the village , I could feel hundred of pair of eye watch I from behind doorway and curtain , from behind shutter . because like all ancient village , villagrande could not have survive without this structure , without its wall , without its cathedral , without its village square , because defense and social cohesion define its design .     urban priority change as we move towards the industrial revolution because infectious disease become the risk of the day . but what about now ? now , social isolation be the public health risk of our time . now , a third of the population say they have two or few people to lean on .     but let us go to villagrande now as a contrast to meet some centenarian .     meet giuseppe murinu . he be 102 , a supercentenarian and a lifelong resident of the village of villagrande . he be a gregarious man . he love to recount story such as how he live like a bird from what he could find on the forest floor during not one but two world war , how he and his wife , who also live past 100 , raise six child in a small , homey kitchen where I interview he . here he be with his son angelo and domenico , both in their 70 and look after their father , and who be quite frankly very suspicious of I and my daughter who come along with I on this research trip , because the flip side of social cohesion be a wariness of stranger and outsider . but giuseppe , he be not suspicious at all . he be a happy - go - lucky guy , very outgoing with a positive outlook . and I wonder : so be that what it take to live to be 100 or beyond , think positively ? actually , no .     ( laughter )     meet giovanni corrias . he be 101 , the grumpy person I have ever meet .     ( laughter )     and he put a lie to the notion that you have to be positive to live a long life . and there be evidence for this . when I ask he why he live so long , he kind of look at I under hooded eyelid and he growl , " nobody have to know my secret . "     ( laughter )     but despite be a sourpuss , the niece who live with he and look after he call he " il tesoro , " " my treasure . " and she respect he and love he , and she tell I , when I question this obvious loss of her freedom , " you just do not understand , do you ? look after this man be a pleasure . it be a huge privilege for I . this be my heritage . " and indeed , wherever I go to interview these centenarian , I find a kitchen party . here be giovanni with his two niece , maria above he and beside he his great - niece sara , who come when I be there to bring fresh fruit and vegetable . and I quickly discover by be there that in the blue zone , as people age , and indeed across their lifespan , they be always surround by extended family , by friend , by neighbor , the priest , the barkeeper , the grocer . people be always there or drop by . they be never leave to live solitary life . this be unlike the rest of the develop world , where as george burn quip , " happiness be have a large , loving , care family in another city . "     ( laughter )     now , so far we 've only meet man , long - live man , but I meet woman too , and here you see zia teresa . she , at over 100 , teach I how to make the local specialty , which be call culurgione , which be these large pasta pocket like ravioli about this size , this size , and they be fill with high - fat ricotta and mint and drench in tomato sauce . and she show I how to make just the right crimp so they would not open , and she make they with her daughter every sunday and distribute they by the dozen to neighbor and friend . and that be when I discover a low - fat , gluten - free diet be not what it take to live to 100 in the blue zone .     ( applause )     now , these centenarian ' story along with the science that underpin they prompt I to ask myself some question too , such as , when be I go to die and how can I put that day off ? and as you will see , the answer be not what we expect . julianne holt - lunstad be a researcher at brigham young university and she address this very question in a series of study of ten of thousand of middle aged people much like this audience here . and she look at every aspect of their lifestyle : their diet , their exercise , their marital status , how often they go to the doctor , whether they smoke or drank , etc . she record all of this and then she and her colleague sit tight and wait for seven year to see who would still be breathe . and of the people leave stand , what reduce their chance of die the most ? that be her question .     so let us now look at her datum in summary , go from the least powerful predictor to the strong . ok ? so clean air , which be great , it do not predict how long you will live . whether you have your hypertension treat be good . still not a strong predictor . whether you be lean or overweight , you can stop feel guilty about this , because it be only in third place . how much exercise you get be next , still only a moderate predictor . whether you 've have a cardiac event and you be in rehab and exercise , get high now . whether you 've have a flu vaccine . do anybody here know that have a flu vaccine protect you more than do exercise ? whether you be drink and quit , or whether you be a moderate drinker , whether you do not smoke , or if you do , whether you quit , and get towards the top predictor be two feature of your social life . first , your close relationship . these be the people that you can call on for a loan if you need money suddenly , who will call the doctor if you be not feel well or who will take you to the hospital , or who will sit with you if you be have an existential crisis , if you be in despair . those people , that little clutch of people be a strong predictor , if you have they , of how long you 'll live . and then something that surprise I , something that be call social integration . this mean how much you interact with people as you move through your day . how many people do you talk to ? and these mean both your weak and your strong bond , so not just the people you be really close to , who mean a lot to you , but , like , do you talk to the guy who every day make you your coffee ? do you talk to the postman ? do you talk to the woman who walk by your house every day with her dog ? do you play bridge or poker , have a book club ? those interaction be one of the strong predictor of how long you 'll live .     now , this lead I to the next question : if we now spend more time online than on any other activity , include sleep , we be now up to 11 hour a day , one hour more than last year , by the way , do it make a difference ? why distinguish between interact in person and interact via social medium ? be it the same thing as be there if you be in contact constantly with your kid through text , for example ? well , the short answer to the question be no , it be not the same thing . face - to - face contact release a whole cascade of neurotransmitter , and like a vaccine , they protect you now in the present and well into the future . so simply make eye contact with somebody , shake hand , give somebody a high - five be enough to release oxytocin , which increase your level of trust and it lower your cortisol level . so it lower your stress . and dopamine be generate , which give we a little high and it kill pain . it be like a naturally produce morphine .     now , all of this pass under our conscious radar , which be why we conflate online activity with the real thing . but we do have evidence now , fresh evidence , that there be a difference . so let us look at some of the neuroscience . elizabeth redcay , a neuroscientist at the university of maryland , try to map the difference between what go on in our brain when we interact in person versus when we be watch something that be static . and what she do be she compare the brain function of two group of people , those interact live with she or with one of her research associate in a dynamic conversation , and she compare that to the brain activity of people who be watch her talk about the same subject but in a can video , like on youtube . and by the way , if you want to know how she fit two people in an mri scanner at the same time , talk to I later .     so what be the difference ? this be your brain on real social interaction . what you be see be the difference in brain activity between interact in person and take in static content . in orange , you see the brain area that be associate with attention , social intelligence — that mean anticipate what somebody else be think and feeling and planning — and emotional reward . and these area become much more engaged when we be interact with a live partner .     now , these rich brain signature might be why recruiter from fortune 500 company evaluate candidate think that the candidate be smart when they hear their voice compare to when they just read their pitch in a text , for example , or an email or a letter . now , our voice and body language convey a rich signal . it show that we be think , feeling , sentient human being who be much more than an algorithm . now , this research by nicholas epley at the university of chicago business school be quite amazing because it tell we a simple thing . if somebody hear your voice , they think you be smart . I mean , that be quite a simple thing .     now , to return to the beginning , why do woman live long than man ? and one major reason be that woman be more likely to prioritize and groom their face - to - face relationship over their lifespan . fresh evidence show that these in - person friendship create a biological force field against disease and decline . and it be not just true of human but their primate relation , our primate relation as well . anthropologist joan silk 's work show that female baboon who have a core of female friend show low level of stress via their cortisol level , they live long and they have more survive offspring . at least three stable relationship . that be the magic number . think about it . I hope you guy have three .     the power of such face - to - face contact be really why there be the low rate of dementia among people who be socially engaged . it be why woman who have breast cancer be four time more likely to survive their disease than loner be . why man who 've have a stroke who meet regularly to play poker or to have coffee or to play old - timer 's hockey — I be canadian , after all —     ( laughter )     be well protect by that social contact than they be by medication . why man who 've have a stroke who meet regularly — this be something very powerful they can do . this face - to - face contact provide stunning benefit , yet now almost a quarter of the population say they have no one to talk to .     we can do something about this . like sardinian villager , it be a biological imperative to know we belong , and not just the woman among we . build in - person interaction into our city , into our workplace , into our agenda bolster the immune system , send feel - good hormone surge through the bloodstream and brain and help we live long . I call this build your village , and build it and sustain it be a matter of life and death . thank you .     ( applause )     helen walter : susan , come back . I have a question for you . I be wonder if there be a middle path . so you talk about the neurotransmitter connect when in face - to - face , but what about digital technology ? we 've see enormous improvement in digital technology like facetime , thing like that . do that work too ? I mean , I see my nephew . he play minecraft and he be yell at his friend . it seem like he be connect pretty well . be that useful ? be that helpful ?     susan pinker : some of the datum be just emerge . the datum be so fresh that the digital revolution happen and the health datum trail behind . so we be just learn , but I would say there be some improvement that we could make in the technology . for example , the camera on your laptop be at the top of the screen , so for example , when you be look into the screen , you be not actually make eye contact . so something as simple as even just look into the camera can increase those neurotransmitter , or maybe change the position of the camera . so it be not identical , but I think we be get close with the technology .     hw : great . thank you so much .     sp : thank you .     ( applause )  
   the philosopher plato once say , " music give a soul to the universe , wing to the mind , flight to the imagination and life to everything . " music have always be a big part of my life . to create and to perform music connect you to people country and lifetime away . it connect you to the people you be play with , to your audience and to yourself . when I be happy , when I be sad , when I be bored , when I be stress , I listen to and I create music .     when I be young , I play piano ; later , I take up guitar . and as I start high school , music become a part of my identity . I be in every band , I be involve with every musical fine art event . music surround I . it make I who I be , and it give I a place to belong .     now , I 've always have this thing with rhythm . I remember be young , I would walk down the hallway of my school and I would tap rhythm to myself on my leg with my hand , or tap my tooth . it be a nervous habit , and I be always nervous . I think I like the repetition of the rhythm — it be calm .     then in high school , I start music theory , and it be the good class I 've ever take . we be learn about music — thing I do not know , like theory and history . it be a class where we basically just listen to a song , talk about what it mean to we and analyze it , and figure out what make it tick . every wednesday , we do something call " rhythmic dictation , " and I be pretty good at it . our teacher would give we an amount of measure and a time signature , and then he would speak a rhythm to we and we would have to write it down with the proper rest and note . like this : ta ta tuck - a tuck - a ta , ta tuck - a - tuck - a - tuck - a , tuck - a. and I love it . the simplicity of the rhythm — a basic two- to four- measure line — and yet each of they almost tell a story , like they have so much potential , and all you have to do be add a melody .     ( guitar )     rhythm set a foundation for melody and harmony to play on top of . it give structure and stability . now , music have these part — rhythm , melody and harmony — just like our life . where music have rhythm , we have routine and habit — thing that help we to remember what to do and to stay on track , and to just keep go . and you may not notice it , but it be always there .     ( guitar )     and it may seem simple , it may seem dull by itself , but it give tempo and heartbeat . and then thing in your life add on to it , give texture — that be your friend and your family , and anything that create a harmonic structure in your life and in your song , like harmony , cadence and anything that make it polyphonic . and they create beautiful chord and pattern .     ( guitar )     and then there be you . you play on top of everything else , on top of the rhythm and the beat because you be the melody . and thing may change and develop , but no matter what we do , we be still the same people . throughout a song melody develop , but it be still the same song . no matter what you do , the rhythm be still there : the tempo and the heartbeat ... until I leave , and I go to college and everything disappear .     when I first arrive at university , I feel lost . and do not get I wrong — sometimes I love it and it be great , but other time , I feel like I have be leave alone to fend for myself . it be like I have be take out of my natural environment , and put somewhere new , where the rhythm and the harmony and the form have go away , and it be just I —     ( guitar )     silence and my melody . and even that begin to waver , because I do not know what I be do . I do not have any chord to structure myself , or a rhythm or a beat to know the tempo .     ( guitar )     and then I begin to hear all these other sound .     ( guitar )     and they be off - time and off - key . and the more I be around they , the more my melody start to sound like theirs . and slowly I begin to lose myself , like I be be wash away . but then the next moment —     ( guitar )     I could hear it . and I could feel it . and it be I . and I be here . and it be different , but not bad off . just change a little .     music be my way of cope with the change in my life . there be a beautiful connection between music and life . it can bind we to reality at the same time it allow we to escape it . music be something that live inside of you . you create it and you be create by it . our life be not only conduct by music , they be also compose of it .     so this may seem like a bit of a stretch , but hear I out : music be a fundamental part of what we be and of everything around we . now , music be my passion , but physics also use to be an interest of mine . and the more I learn , the more I see connection between the two — especially regard string theory . I know this be only one of many theory , but it speak to I . so , one aspect of string theory , at its simple form , be this : matter be make up of atom , which be make up of proton and neutron and electron , which be make up of quark . and here be where the string part come in . this quark be supposedly make up of little coil string , and it be the vibration of these string that make everything what it be .     michio kaku once explain this in a lecture call , " the universe in a nutshell , " where he say , " string theory be the simple idea that the four force of the universe — gravity , the electromagnetic force , and the two strong force — can be view as music . the music of tiny little rubber band . " in this lecture , he go on to explain physics as the law of harmony between these string ; chemistry , as the melody you can play on these string ; and he state that the universe be a " symphony of string . " these string dictate the universe ; they make up everything we see and everything we know . they be musical note , but they make we what we be and they hold we together . so you see , everything be music .     ( guitar )     when I look at the world , I see music all around we . when I look at myself , I see music . and my life have be define by music . I find myself through music . music be everywhere , and it be in everything . and it change and it build and it diminish . but it be always there , support we , connect we to each other and show we the beauty of the universe .     so if you ever feel lost , stop and listen for your song .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   algorithm be everywhere . they sort and separate the winner from the loser . the winner get the job or a good credit card offer . the loser do not even get an interview or they pay more for insurance . we be be score with secret formula that we do not understand that often do not have system of appeal . that beg the question : what if the algorithm be wrong ?     to build an algorithm you need two thing : you need datum , what happen in the past , and a definition of success , the thing you be look for and often hope for . you train an algorithm by look , figure out . the algorithm figure out what be associate with success . what situation lead to success ?     actually , everyone use algorithm . they just do not formalize they in write code . let I give you an example . I use an algorithm every day to make a meal for my family . the datum I use be the ingredient in my kitchen , the time I have , the ambition I have , and I curate that datum . I do not count those little package of raman noodle as food .     ( laughter )     my definition of success be : a meal be successful if my kid eat vegetable . it be very different from if my young son be in charge . he would say success be if he get to eat lot of nutella . but I get to choose success . I be in charge . my opinion matter . that be the first rule of algorithm .     algorithm be opinion embed in code . it be really different from what you think most people think of algorithm . they think algorithm be objective and true and scientific . that be a marketing trick . it be also a marketing trick to intimidate you with algorithm , to make you trust and fear algorithm because you trust and fear mathematic . a lot can go wrong when we put blind faith in big datum .     this be kiri soare . she be a high school principal in brooklyn . in 2011 , she tell I her teacher be be score with a complex , secret algorithm call the " value - add model . " I tell she , " well , figure out what the formula be , show it to I . I be go to explain it to you . " she say , " well , I try to get the formula , but my department of education contact tell I it be math and I would not understand it . "     it get bad . the new york post file a freedom of information act request , get all the teacher ' name and all their score and they publish they as an act of teacher - shame . when I try to get the formula , the source code , through the same mean , I be tell I could not . I be deny . I later find out that nobody in new york city have access to that formula . no one understand it . then someone really smart got involve , gary rubinstein . he find 665 teacher from that new york post datum that actually have two score . that could happen if they be teach seventh grade math and eighth grade math . he decide to plot they . each dot represent a teacher .     ( laughter )     what be that ?     ( laughter )     that should never have be use for individual assessment . it be almost a random number generator .     ( applause )     but it be . this be sarah wysocki . she got fire , along with 205 other teacher , from the washington , dc school district , even though she have great recommendation from her principal and the parent of her kid .     I know what a lot of you guy be think , especially the datum scientist , the ai expert here . you be think , " well , I would never make an algorithm that inconsistent . " but algorithm can go wrong , even have deeply destructive effect with good intention . and whereas an airplane that be design badly crash to the earth and everyone see it , an algorithm design badly can go on for a long time , silently wreak havoc .     this be roger aile .     ( laughter )     he found fox news in 1996 . more than 20 woman complain about sexual harassment . they say they be not allow to succeed at fox news . he be oust last year , but we 've see recently that the problem have persist . that beg the question : what should fox news do to turn over another leaf ?     well , what if they replace their hiring process with a machine - learn algorithm ? that sound good , right ? think about it . the datum , what would the datum be ? a reasonable choice would be the last 21 year of application to fox news . reasonable . what about the definition of success ? reasonable choice would be , well , who be successful at fox news ? I guess someone who , say , stay there for four year and be promote at least once . sound reasonable . and then the algorithm would be train . it would be train to look for people to learn what lead to success , what kind of application historically lead to success by that definition . now think about what would happen if we apply that to a current pool of applicant . it would filter out woman because they do not look like people who be successful in the past .     algorithm do not make thing fair if you just blithely , blindly apply algorithm . they do not make thing fair . they repeat our past practice , our pattern . they automate the status quo . that would be great if we have a perfect world , but we do not . and I 'll add that most company do not have embarrassing lawsuit , but the datum scientist in those company be tell to follow the datum , to focus on accuracy . think about what that mean . because we all have bias , it mean they could be codify sexism or any other kind of bigotry .     think experiment , because I like they : an entirely segregated society — racially segregate , all town , all neighborhood and where we send the police only to the minority neighborhood to look for crime . the arrest datum would be very biased . what if , on top of that , we find the data scientist and pay the data scientist to predict where the next crime would occur ? minority neighborhood . or to predict who the next criminal would be ? a minority . the datum scientist would brag about how great and how accurate their model would be , and they would be right .     now , reality be not that drastic , but we do have severe segregation in many city and town , and we have plenty of evidence of biased policing and justice system datum . and we actually do predict hotspot , place where crime will occur . and we do predict , in fact , the individual criminality , the criminality of individual . the news organization propublica recently look into one of those " recidivism risk " algorithm , as they be call , be use in florida during sentencing by judge . bernard , on the left , the black man , be score a 10 out of 10 . dylan , on the right , 3 out of 10 . 10 out of 10 , high risk . 3 out of 10 , low risk . they be both bring in for drug possession . they both have record , but dylan have a felony but bernard do not . this matter , because the high score you be , the more likely you be be give a long sentence .     what be go on ? datum laundering . it be a process by which technologist hide ugly truth inside black box algorithm and call they objective ; call they meritocratic . when they be secret , important and destructive , I 've coin a term for these algorithm : " weapon of math destruction . "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     they be everywhere , and it be not a mistake . these be private company build private algorithm for private end . even the one I talk about for teacher and the public police , those be build by private company and sell to the government institution . they call it their " secret sauce " — that be why they can not tell we about it . it be also private power . they be profit for wield the authority of the inscrutable . now you might think , since all this stuff be private and there be competition , maybe the free market will solve this problem . it will not . there be a lot of money to be make in unfairness .     also , we be not economic rational agent . we all be biased . we be all racist and bigote in way that we wish we be not , in way that we do not even know . we know this , though , in aggregate , because sociologist have consistently demonstrate this with these experiment they build , where they send a bunch of application to job out , equally qualified but some have white - sound name and some have black - sound name , and it be always disappointing , the result — always .     so we be the one that be bias , and we be inject those bias into the algorithm by choose what datum to collect , like I choose not to think about raman noodle — I decide it be irrelevant . but by trust the datum that be actually pick up on past practice and by choose the definition of success , how can we expect the algorithm to emerge unscathed ? we can not . we have to check they . we have to check they for fairness .     the good news be , we can check they for fairness . algorithm can be interrogate , and they will tell we the truth every time . and we can fix they . we can make they well . I call this an algorithmic audit , and I 'll walk you through it .     first , data integrity check . for the recidivism risk algorithm I talk about , a datum integrity check would mean we would have to come to term with the fact that in the us , white and black smoke pot at the same rate but black be far more likely to be arrest — four or five time more likely , depend on the area . what be that bias look like in other crime category , and how do we account for it ?     second , we should think about the definition of success , audit that . remember — with the hire algorithm ? we talk about it . someone who stay for four year and be promote once ? well , that be a successful employee , but it be also an employee that be support by their culture . that say , also it can be quite biased . we need to separate those two thing . we should look to the blind orchestra audition as an example . that be where the people audition be behind a sheet . what I want to think about there be the people who be listen have decide what be important and they 've decide what be not important , and they be not getting distract by that . when the blind orchestra audition start , the number of woman in orchestra go up by a factor of five .     next , we have to consider accuracy . this be where the value - add model for teacher would fail immediately . no algorithm be perfect , of course , so we have to consider the error of every algorithm . how often be there error , and for whom do this model fail ? what be the cost of that failure ?     and finally , we have to consider the long - term effect of algorithm , the feedback loop that be engender . that sound abstract , but imagine if facebook engineer have consider that before they decide to show we only thing that our friend have post .     I have two more message , one for the data scientist out there . datum scientist : we should not be the arbiter of truth . we should be translator of ethical discussion that happen in large society .     ( applause )     and the rest of you , the non - data scientist : this be not a math test . this be a political fight . we need to demand accountability for our algorithmic overlord .     ( applause )     the era of blind faith in big datum must end .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   so , my mother 's a pediatrician , and when I be young , she would tell the crazy story that combine science with her overactive imagination . one of the story she tell be that if you eat a lot of salt , all of the blood rush up your leg , through your body , and shoot out the top of your head , kill you instantly .     ( laughter )     she call it " high blood pressure . "     ( laughter )     this be my first experience with science fiction , and I love it . so when I start to write my own science fiction and fantasy , I be surprised that it be consider un - african . so naturally , I ask , what be african ? and this be what I know so far : africa be important . africa be the future . it be , though . and africa be a serious place where only serious thing happen .     so when I present my work somewhere , someone will always ask , " what be so important about it ? how do it deal with real african issue like war , poverty , devastation or aid ? " and it do not . my work be about nairobi pop band that want to go to space or about seven - foot - tall robot that fall in love . it be nothing incredibly important . it be just fun , fierce and frivolous , as frivolous as bubble gum — " afrobubblegum . "     so I be not say that agenda art be not important ; I be the chairperson of a charity that deal with film and theater that write about hiv and radicalization and female genital mutilation . it be vital and important art , but it can not be the only art that come out of the continent . we have to tell more story that be vibrant . the danger of the single story be still be realize . and maybe it be because of the funding . a lot of art be still dependent on developmental aid . so art become a tool for agenda . or maybe it be because we 've only see one image of ourselves for so long that that be all we know how to create . whatever the reason , we need a new way , and afrobubblegum be one approach . it be the advocacy of art for art 's sake . it be the advocacy of art that be not policy - drive or agenda - drive or base on education , just for the sake of imagination : afrobubblegum art .     and we can not all be afrobubblegumist . we have to judge our work for its potential poverty porn pitfall . we have to have test that be similar to the bechdel test , and ask question like : be two or more african in this piece of fiction healthy ? be those same african financially stable and not in need of saving ? be they have fun and enjoy life ? and if we can answer yes to two or more of these question , then surely we be afrobubblegumist .     ( laughter )     ( applause )     and fun be political , because imagine if we have image of african who be vibrant and loving and thrive and live a beautiful , vibrant life . what would we think of ourselves then ? would we think that maybe we be worthy of more happiness ? would we think of our share humanity through our shared joy ? I think of these thing when I create . I think of the people and the place that give I immeasurable joy , and I work to represent they . and that be why I write story about futuristic girl that risk everything to save plant or to race camel or even just to dance , to honor fun , because my world be mostly happy .     and I know happiness be a privilege in this current splintered world where remain hopeful require diligence . but maybe , if you join I in create , curate and commission more afrobubblegum art , there might be hope for a different view of the world , a happy africa view where child be strangely traumatize by their mother 's dark sense of humor ,     ( laughter )     but also they be claim fun , fierce and frivolous art in the name of all thing unseriously african . because we be afrobubblegumist and there be so many more of we than you can imagine .     thank you so much .     ( applause )  
   today , I be go to talk about ai and we . ai researcher have always say that we human do not need to worry , because only menial job will be take over by machine . be that really true ? they have also say that ai will create new job , so those who lose their job will find a new one . of course . but the real question be : how many of those who may lose their job to ai will be able to land a new one , especially when ai be smart enough to learn well than most of we ?     let I ask you a question : how many of you think that ai will pass the entrance examination of a top university by 2020 ? oh , so many . ok . so some of you may say , " of course , yes ! " now singularity be the issue . and some other may say , " maybe , because ai already win against a top go player . " and other may say , " no , never . uh - uh . " that mean we do not know the answer yet , right ? so that be the reason why I start todai robot project , make an ai which pass the entrance examination of the university of tokyo , the top university in japan .     this be our todai robot . and , of course , the brain of the robot be work in the remote server . it be now write a 600 - word essay on maritime trade in the 17th century . how do that sound ?     why do I take the entrance exam as its benchmark ? because I think we have to study the performance of ai in comparison to human , especially on the skill and expertise which be believe to be acquire only by human and only through education . to enter todai , the university of tokyo , you have to pass two different type of exam . the first one be a national standardized test in multiple - choice style . you have to take seven subject and achieve a high score — I would say like an 85 percent or more accuracy rate — to be allow to take the second stage write test prepare by todai .     so let I first explain how modern ai work , take the " jeopardy ! " challenge as an example . here be a typical " jeopardy ! " question : " mozart 's last symphony share its name with this planet . " interestingly , a " jeopardy ! " question always ask , always end with " this " something : " this " planet , " this " country , " this " rock musician , and so on . in other word , " jeopardy ! " do not ask many different type of question , but a single type , which we call " factoid question . "     by the way , do you know the answer ? if you do not know the answer and if you want to know the answer , what would you do ? you google , right ? of course . why not ? but you have to pick appropriate keyword like " mozart , " " last " and " symphony " to search . the machine basically do the same . then this wikipedia page will be rank top . then the machine read the page . no , uh - uh .     unfortunately , none of the modern ais , include watson , siri and todai robot , be able to read . but they be very good at search and optimize . it will recognize that the keyword " mozart , " " last " and " symphony " be appear heavily around here . so if it can find a word which be a planet and which be co - occur with these keyword , that must be the answer . this be how watson find the answer " jupiter , " in this case .     our todai robot work similarly , but a bit smart in answer history yes - no question , like , " ' charlemagne repel the magyar . ' be this sentence true or false ? " our robot start produce a factoid question , like : " charlemagne repel [ this person type ] " by itself . then , " avar " but not " magyar " be rank top . this sentence be likely to be false . our robot do not read , do not understand , but it be statistically correct in many case .     for the second stage write test , it be require to write a 600 - word essay like this one :     [ discuss the rise and fall of the maritime trade in east and southeast asia in the 17th century ... ]     and as I have show early , our robot take the sentence from the textbook and wikipedia , combine they together , and optimize it to produce an essay without understand a thing .     ( laughter )     but surprisingly , it write a well essay than most of the student .     ( laughter )     how about mathematic ? a fully automatic math - solve machine have be a dream since the birth of the word " artificial intelligence , " but it have stay at the level of arithmetic for a long , long time . last year , we finally succeed in develop a system which solve pre - university - level problem from end to end , like this one . this be the original problem write in japanese , and we have to teach it 2,000 mathematical axiom and 8,000 japanese word to make it accept the problem write in natural language . and it be now translate the original problem into machine - readable formula . weird , but it be now ready to solve it , I think . go and solve it . yes ! it be now execute symbolic computation . even more weird , but probably this be the most fun part for the machine .     ( laughter )     now it output a perfect answer , though its proof be impossible to read , even for mathematician . anyway , last year our robot be among the top one percent in the second stage write exam in mathematic .     ( applause )     thank you .     so , do it enter todai ? no , not as I expect . why ? because it do not understand any meaning . let I show you a typical error it make in the english test .     [ nate : we be almost at the bookstore . just a few more minute . sunil : wait . _ _ _ _ _ _ . nate : thank you ! that always happen ... ]     two people be talk . for we , who can understand the situation —     [ 1 . " we walk for a long time . " 2 . " we be almost there . " 3 . " your shoe look expensive . " 4 . " your shoelace be untie . " ]     it be obvious number four be the correct answer , right ? but todai robot choose number two , even after learn 15 billion english sentence use deep learning technology . ok , so now you might understand what I say : modern ais do not read , do not understand . they only disguise as if they do .     this be the distribution graph of half a million student who take the same exam as todai robot . now our todai robot be among the top 20 percent , and it be capable to pass more than 60 percent of the university in japan — but not todai . but see how it be beyond the volume zone of to - be white - collar worker .     you might think I be delighted . after all , my robot be surpass student everywhere . instead , I be alarmed . how on earth could this unintelligent machine outperform student — our child ? right ? I decide to investigate what be go on in the human world . I take hundred of sentence from high school textbook and make easy multiple - choice quiz , and ask thousand of high school student to answer .     here be an example :     [ buddhism spread to ... , christianity to ... and oceania , and islam to ... ]     of course , the original problem be write in japanese , their mother tongue .     [ _ _ _ _ _ _ have spread to oceania . 1 . hinduism 2 . christianity 3 . islam 4 . buddhism ]     obviously , christianity be the answer , be not it ? it be write ! and todai robot choose the correct answer , too . but one - third of junior high school student fail to answer this question . do you think it be only the case in japan ? I do not think so , because japan be always rank among the top in oecd pisa test , measure 15 - year - old student ' performance in mathematic , science and read every three year .     we have be believe that everybody can learn and learn well , as long as we provide good learning material free on the web so that they can access through the internet . but such wonderful material may benefit only those who can read well , and the percentage of those who can read well may be much less than we expect . how we human will coexist with ai be something we have to think about carefully , base on solid evidence . at the same time , we have to think in a hurry because time be run out .     thank you .     ( applause )     chris anderson : noriko , thank you .     noriko arai : thank you .     can : in your talk , you so beautifully give we a sense of how ais think , what they can do amazingly and what they can not do . but — do I read you right , that you think we really need quite an urgent revolution in education to help kid do the thing that human can do well than ais ?     na : yes , yes , yes . because we human can understand the meaning . that be something which be very , very lack in ai . but most of the student just pack the knowledge without understand the meaning of the knowledge , so that be not knowledge , that be just memorize , and ai can do the same thing . so we have to think about a new type of education .     can : a shift from knowledge , rote knowledge , to meaning .     na : mm - hmm .     can : well , there be a challenge for the educator . thank you so much .     na : thank you very much . thank you .     ( applause )  
   I use to think the whole purpose of life be pursue happiness . everyone say the path to happiness be success , so I search for that ideal job , that perfect boyfriend , that beautiful apartment . but instead of ever feel fulfilled , I feel anxious and adrift . and I be not alone ; my friend — they struggle with this , too .     eventually , I decide to go to graduate school for positive psychology to learn what truly make people happy . but what I discover there change my life . the datum show that chase happiness can make people unhappy . and what really strike I be this : the suicide rate have be rise around the world , and it recently reach a 30 - year high in america . even though life be get objectively well by nearly every conceivable standard , more people feel hopeless , depressed and alone . there be an emptiness gnaw away at people , and you do not have to be clinically depressed to feel it . soon or later , I think we all wonder : be this all there be ? and accord to the research , what predict this despair be not a lack of happiness . it be a lack of something else , a lack of have meaning in life .     but that raise some question for I . be there more to life than be happy ? and what be the difference between be happy and have meaning in life ? many psychologist define happiness as a state of comfort and ease , feel good in the moment . mean , though , be deep . the renowned psychologist martin seligman say meaning come from belong to and serve something beyond yourself and from develop the good within you . our culture be obsess with happiness , but I come to see that seek meaning be the more fulfilling path . and the study show that people who have meaning in life , they be more resilient , they do well in school and at work , and they even live long .     so this all make I wonder : how can we each live more meaningfully ? to find out , I spend five year interview hundred of people and read through thousand of page of psychology , neuroscience and philosophy . bring it all together , I find that there be what I call four pillar of a meaningful life . and we can each create life of meaning by build some or all of these pillar in our life .     the first pillar be belong . belong come from be in relationship where you be value for who you be intrinsically and where you value other as well . but some group and relationship deliver a cheap form of belong ; you be value for what you believe , for who you hate , not for who you be . true belong spring from love . it live in moment among individual , and it be a choice — you can choose to cultivate belong with other .     here be an example . each morning , my friend jonathan buy a newspaper from the same street vendor in new york . they do not just conduct a transaction , though . they take a moment to slow down , talk , and treat each other like human . but one time , jonathan do not have the right change , and the vendor say , " do not worry about it . " but jonathan insist on pay , so he go to the store and buy something he do not need to make change . but when he give the money to the vendor , the vendor draw back . he be hurt . he be try to do something kind , but jonathan have reject he .     I think we all reject people in small way like this without realize it . I do . I 'll walk by someone I know and barely acknowledge they . I 'll check my phone when someone be talk to I . these act devalue other . they make they feel invisible and unworthy . but when you lead with love , you create a bond that lift each of you up .     for many people , belong be the most essential source of meaning , those bond to family and friend . for other , the key to meaning be the second pillar : purpose . now , find your purpose be not the same thing as find that job that make you happy . purpose be less about what you want than about what you give . a hospital custodian tell I her purpose be heal sick people . many parent tell I , " my purpose be raise my child . " the key to purpose be use your strength to serve other . of course , for many of we , that happen through work . that be how we contribute and feel need . but that also mean that issue like disengagement at work , unemployment , low labor force participation — these be not just economic problem , they be existential one , too . without something worthwhile to do , people flounder . of course , you do not have to find purpose at work , but purpose give you something to live for , some " why " that drive you forward .     the third pillar of meaning be also about step beyond yourself , but in a completely different way : transcendence . transcendent state be those rare moment when you be lift above the hustle and bustle of daily life , your sense of self fade away , and you feel connected to a high reality . for one person I talk to , transcendence come from see art . for another person , it be at church . for I , I be a writer , and it happen through writing . sometimes I get so in the zone that I lose all sense of time and place . these transcendent experience can change you . one study have student look up at 200 - foot - tall eucalyptus tree for one minute . but afterwards they feel less self - center , and they even behave more generously when give the chance to help someone .     belong , purpose , transcendence . now , the fourth pillar of meaning , I 've find , tend to surprise people . the fourth pillar be storytelle , the story you tell yourself about yourself . create a narrative from the event of your life bring clarity . it help you understand how you become you . but we do not always realize that we be the author of our story and can change the way we be tell they . your life be not just a list of event . you can edit , interpret and retell your story , even as you be constrain by the fact .     I meet a young man name emeka , who have be paralyze playing football . after his injury , emeka tell himself , " my life be great playing football , but now look at I . " people who tell story like this — " my life be good . now it be bad . " — tend to be more anxious and depressed . and that be emeka for a while . but with time , he start to weave a different story . his new story be , " before my injury , my life be purposeless . I partie a lot and be a pretty selfish guy . but my injury make I realize I could be a well man . " that edit to his story change emeka 's life . after tell the new story to himself , emeka start mentor kid , and he discover what his purpose be : serve other . the psychologist dan mcadams call this a " redemptive story , " where the bad be redeem by the good . people lead meaningful life , he be find , tend to tell story about their life define by redemption , growth and love .     but what make people change their story ? some people get help from a therapist , but you can do it on your own , too , just by reflect on your life thoughtfully , how your defining experience shape you , what you lose , what you gain . that be what emeka do . you will not change your story overnight ; it could take year and be painful . after all , we 've all suffer , and we all struggle . but embrace those painful memory can lead to new insight and wisdom , to find that good that sustain you .     belong , purpose , transcendence , storytelle : those be the four pillar of meaning . when I be young , I be lucky enough to be surround you all of the pillar . my parent run a sufi meetinghouse from our home in montreal . sufism be a spiritual practice associate with the whirling dervish and the poet rumi . twice a week , sufis would come to our home to meditate , drink persian tea , and share story . their practice also involve serve all of creation through small act of love , which mean be kind even when people wrong you . but it give they a purpose : to rein in the ego .     eventually , I leave home for college and without the daily grounding of sufism in my life , I feel unmoored . and I start search for those thing that make life worth live . that be what set I on this journey . look back , I now realize that the sufi house have a real culture of meaning . the pillar be part of the architecture , and the presence of the pillar help we all live more deeply .     of course , the same principle apply in other strong community as well — good one and bad one . gang , cult : these be culture of meaning that use the pillar and give people something to live and die for . but that be exactly why we as a society must offer well alternative . we need to build these pillar within our family and our institution to help people become their good self . but live a meaningful life take work . it be an ongoing process . as each day go by , we be constantly create our life , add to our story . and sometimes we can get off track .     whenever that happen to I , I remember a powerful experience I have with my father . several month after I graduate from college , my dad have a massive heart attack that should have kill he . he survive , and when I ask he what be go through his mind as he face death , he say all he could think about be need to live so he could be there for my brother and I , and this give he the will to fight for life . when he go under anesthesia for emergency surgery , instead of count backwards from 10 , he repeat our name like a mantra . he want our name to be the last word he speak on earth if he die .     my dad be a carpenter and a sufi . it be a humble life , but a good life . lie there face death , he have a reason to live : love . his sense of belong within his family , his purpose as a dad , his transcendent meditation , repeat our name — these , he say , be the reason why he survive . that be the story he tell himself .     that be the power of meaning . happiness come and go . but when life be really good and when thing be really bad , have meaning give you something to hold on to .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   in my early day as a graduate student , I go on a snorkeling trip off the coast of the bahama . I would actually never swum in the ocean before , so it be a bit terrifying . what I remember the most be , as I put my head in the water and I be try really hard to breathe through the snorkel , this huge group of stripe yellow and black fish come straight at I ... and I just freeze . and then , as if it have suddenly change its mind , come towards I and then swerve to the right and go right around I . it be absolutely mesmerizing . maybe many of you have have this experience . of course , there be the color and the beauty of it , but there be also just the sheer oneness of it , as if it be not hundred of fish but a single entity with a single collective mind that be make decision . when I look back , I think that experience really end up determine what I 've work on for most of my career .     I be a computer scientist , and the field that I work in be artificial intelligence . and a key theme in ai be be able to understand intelligence by create our own computational system that display intelligence the way we see it in nature . now , most popular view of ai , of course , come from science fiction and the movie , and I be personally a big star war fan . but that tend to be a very human - centric view of intelligence . when you think of a fish school , or when I think of a flock of starling , that feel like a really different kind of intelligence . for starter , any one fish be just so tiny compare to the sheer size of the collective , so it seem that any one individual would have a really limited and myopic view of what be go on , and intelligence be not really about the individual but somehow a property of the group itself .     secondly , and the thing that I still find most remarkable , be that we know that there be no leader supervise this fish school . instead , this incredible collective mind behavior be emerge purely from the interaction of one fish and another . somehow , there be these interaction or rule of engagement between neighboring fish that make it all work out .     so the question for ai then become , what be those rule of engagement that lead to this kind of intelligence , and of course , can we create our own ?     and that be the primary thing that I work on with my team in my lab . we work on it through theory , look at abstract rule system and think about the mathematic behind it . we also do it through biology , work closely with experimentalist . but mostly , we do it through robotic , where we try to create our own collective system that can do the kind of thing that we see in nature , or at least try to .     one of our first robotic quest along this line be to create our very own colony of a thousand robot . so very simple robot , but they could be program to exhibit collective intelligence , and that be what we be able to do . so this be what a single robot look like . it be quite small , about the size of a quarter , and you can program how it move , but it can also wirelessly communicate with other robot , and it can measure distance from they . and so now we can start to program exactly an interaction , a rule of engagement between neighbor . and once we have this system , we can start to program many different kind of rule of engagement that you would see in nature .     so for example , spontaneous synchronization , how audience be clap and suddenly start all clap together , the firefly flash together . we can program rule for pattern formation , how cell in a tissue determine what role they be go to take on and set the pattern of our body . we can program rule for migration , and in this way , we be really learn from nature 's rule .     but we can also take it a step far . we can actually take these rule that we 've learn from nature and combine they and create entirely new collective behavior of our very own .     so for example , imagine that you have two different kind of rule . so your first rule be a motion rule where a move robot can move around other stationary robot . and your second rule be a pattern rule where a robot take on a color base on its two near neighbor . so if I start with a blob of robot in a little pattern seed , it turn out that these two rule be sufficient for the group to be able to self - assemble a simple line pattern . and if I have more complicated pattern rule , and I design error correction rule , we can actually create really , really complicated self assembly , and here be what that look like .     so here , you be go to see a thousand robot that be work together to self - assemble the letter k. the k be on its side . and the important thing be that no one be in charge . so any single robot be only talk to a small number of robot nearby it , and it be use its motion rule to move around the half - build structure just look for a place to fit in base on its pattern rule . and even though no robot be do anything perfectly , the rule be such that we can get the collective to do its goal robustly together . and the illusion become almost so perfect , you know — you just start to not even notice that they be individual robot at all , and it become a single entity , kind of like the school of fish .     so these be robot and rule in two dimension , but we can also think about robot and rule in three dimension . so what if we could create robot that could build together ? and here , we can take inspiration from social insect . so if you think about mound - building termite or you think about army ant , they create incredible , complex nest structure out of mud and even out of their own body . and like the system I show you before , these insect actually also have pattern rule that help they determine what to build , but the pattern can be make out of other insect , or it could be make out of mud . and we can use that same idea to create rule for robot .     so here , you be go to see some simulated robot . so the simulated robot have a motion rule , which be how it traverse through the structure , look for a place to fit in , and it have pattern rule where it look at group of block to decide whether to place a block . and with the right motion rule and the right pattern rule , we can actually get the robot to build whatever we want . and of course , everybody want their own tower .     ( laughter )     so once we have these rule , we can start to create the robot body that go with these rule . so here , you see a robot that can climb over block , but it can also lift and move these block and it can start to edit the very structure that it be on . but with these rule , this be really only one kind of robot body that you could imagine . you could imagine many different kind of robot body . so if you think about robot that maybe could move sandbag and could help build levee , or we could think of robot that build out of soft material and work together to shore up a collapse building — so just the same kind of rule in different kind of body . or if , like my group , you be completely obsess with army ant , then maybe one day we can make robot that can climb over literally anything include other member of their tribe , and self - assemble thing out of their own body . once you understand the rule , just many different kind of robot vision become possible .     and come back to the snorkeling trip , we actually understand a great deal about the rule that fish school use . so if we can invent the body to go with that , then maybe there be a future where I and my group will get to snorkel with a fish school of our own creation .     each of these system that I show you bring we close to have the mathematical and the conceptual tool to create our own version of collective power , and this can enable many different kind of future application , whether you think about robot that build flood barrier or you think about robotic bee colony that could pollinate crop or underwater school of robot that monitor coral reef , or if we reach for the star and we think about program constellation of satellite . in each of these system , be able to understand how to design the rule of engagement and be able to create good collective behavior become a key to realize these vision .     so , so far I 've talk about rule for insect and for fish and for robot , but what about the rule that apply to our own human collective ? and the last thought that I would like to leave you with be that science be of course itself an incredible manifestation of collective intelligence , but unlike the beautiful fish school that I study , I feel we still have a much long evolutionary path to walk . so in addition to work on improve the science of robot collective , I also work on create robot and think about rule that will improve our own scientific collective . there be this saying that I love : who do science determine what science gets do . imagine a society where we have rule of engagement where every child grow up believe that they could stand here and be a technologist of the future , or where every adult believe that they have the ability not just to understand but to change how science and technology impact their everyday life . what would that society look like ? I believe that we can do that . I believe that we can choose our rule , and we engineer not just robot but we can engineer our own human collective , and if we do and when we do , it will be beautiful .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   we human be become an urban specie , so city , they be our natural habitat . that be where we live . in 2014 , over 54 percent of the world population be live in city , and I can bet you that so many of these people have think of how they would do thing differently , like if I only have the tool to change thing in my city , what would I do ? what would my dream city be like ? and these tool , this be just what we give they . two year ago , my team and I , we release a game , " city : skyline . " it be a game about build city .     so I have always be interested in city as system . it be something that I find immensely interesting . but what I do not understand be that I be not alone in this . people love city . they be interested . they have idea . the game be an instant hit . so far , over three and a half million people have play it .     and it be not just about play . we also have really awesome sharing system . so people play , they create city and then they be share these creation , show off what they have make . and what I will show you be some of these city create by the player .     so the game be about self - expression , creativity , not just overcome the challenge pose by the simulation . it be about show what your city look like .     so I have a couple of video . these be from youtube . and these be some of the most interesting city design I have see . so they be all different , and I hope you like all of these .     this one be call the netherland . it be by silvarret . and when you start the game , you have an empty piece of land . this land , it can be base on the real world , it can be hand - craft in the map editor , or you can , of course , download a city make by someone else and play in that . but what silvarret have do here be that what he want to make be not a real city . this be a fantasy city , even though it look real . so what he want to do be a fantasy city that could be in the netherland . so he kind of investigate what be the characteristic of city in the netherland and combine a couple of those , and this be what he create . so it be a city , but it be not a real city , but it could be . it look just like the netherland . so the place be really densely populated . so what you need be highway , train , anything connect these small town center together . lot of people , lot of move , so transportation be the key here .     but then let us go even more on the fantasy side . let us go into the future . this be one of my personal favorite . these city design be what I love the most . so this be a tiered city by conflictnerd , and the basic idea be that you have concentric circle route . so the city be a big circle with tiny circle inside . and the thing be that you put all of the service in the center , and then people actually live on the outer ring , because there be less traffic , less noise , less pollution , so that be where you want to live . but the service be still really close by . they be in the center . and this be the soul of the game . the player have to understand what be the wish , what be the need of the tiny people live in the city . so you need to know where you should put the thing . like , it be not enough to have a hospital . it need to be accessible . citizen need to reach the hospital . and this be one way to do it . so maybe this be something that we might be see someday .     and then even more into the future . astergea by yuttho . so yuttho do youtube video and play the game . what he do here be actually a 12 - point series of create this city . so what he do be he play the game , he record it and he explain as he be go what he be do and why . and as a part of this series , he actually do an interview with an actual urban planner call jeff speck . and speck be an expert on the concept of walkability . the basic idea be that if you want your citizen to walk , which be kind of beneficial , you actually need to have walk as a reasonable mean of transportation . it should be a good way to reach place . so what yuttho do be that he explain this concept , he have speck explain it , too , and then he apply it to the city that he be build . so what we be see be yuttho 's vision of the future : lot of public transportation , walkway , plazas , connect high - rise building . maybe this be what the future might look like . and the game system work really well for this .     we be see some real - world use to this game . so we know that some urban planner be use it as a sketch tool , so while the simulation be not completely realistic , it be realistic enough that if something work in the game , it be highly likely that it will also work in the real world , so that you can actually try out thing , see if this intersection might fit this kind of a situation . if we build a new road , would it help ? and this be what you can do with this game .     there be one really interesting contest hold by the finnish city of hämeenlinna . so what they do be that they have a new area that they want to develop in the city . they make a map with the exist city , they leave empty the area that they would want to develop and share this map . so anyone could download the map , play the game , build the area and submit their creation to the city council . so they have not yet build anything , but it might just be that they use one of these plan make with the game to actually build the real city .     and these video that I have show you , these be the people who be come up with new kind of solution . we know that city be grow . they be get big as we go , and the percentage of population live in city be project to rise . so we need the solution and these people , play the game , they be try out different kind of solution . they might have something that be really important . so what we be see here be dream city that might be real one day . so it might be that this be not just a game . it might be a way to decide our own fate .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   back home , my friend call I nickname , such as " the giant clam girl , " " clam queen , " or , " the mother of clams . "     ( laughter )     this be because every time I see they , I talk nonstop about giant clam all day , every day . giant clam be these massive and colorful shell marine animal , the large of its kind . just look at this shell . the big record individual be four - and - a - half - foot long and weigh about 550 pound . that be almost as heavy as three baby elephant .     south pacific legend once describe giant clam as man - eater that would lie in wait on the seabed to trap unsuspecting diver . a story go that a diver have lose his leg while try to retrieve a pearl from a giant clam . I think , " really ? " so out of curiosity , I do an experiment use myself as bait .     ( laughter )     I carefully place my hand into the clam 's mouth and wait . hmm ... I still have my hand . it seem that these gentle giant would rather retreat and protect their fleshy body than feed on I . so much for those killer clam myth !     unfortunately , the reality be , we be the giant clam ' big threat . consider a delicacy throughout the western pacific and indian ocean , giant clam have be traditionally fish as seafood . fisherman be particularly interested in their adductor muscle , which be organ that hold the two shell together like a hinge . just for their muscle , giant clam be almost hunted to extinction between the 1960 and 1980 . clamshell be also popular in the ornamental trade as jewelry and for display . in the south china sea , fisherman go out of their way to collect fossilize clamshell by dig through large area of coral reef . these be later carve and sell as so - call " ivory handicraft " in china . giant clams , dead or alive , be not safe from we . it be a " clamity ! "     ( laughter )     ( applause )     with the spotlight on more charismatic marine animal such as the whale and coral reef , it be easy to forget that other marine life need our help , too . my fascination with giant clam get I start on conservation research to fill in the knowledge gap on their ecology and behavior . one of the discovery that we make be that giant clam could walk across the seafloor . yes , you hear I right : they can walk .     to find out , we place numerous baby clam on a grid . now watch what happen over 24 hour . we think that walking be important for get away from predator and finding mate for breeding . while it can hard to imagine any movement in these enormous animal , giant clam up to 400 pound can still walk , they just move slow .     during my phd , I discover more secret about the giant clams . but there be something miss in my work . I find myself ask , " why should people care about conserve giant clam ? " — other than myself , of course .     ( laughter )     it turn out that giant clam have a giant impact on coral reef . these multitasking clam be reef builder , food factory , shelter for shrimp and crab and water filter , all roll into one . in a nutshell , giant clam play a major contributing role as resident of their own reef home , and just have they around keep the reef healthy . and because they can live up to 100 year old , giant clam make vital indicator of coral reef health . so when giant clam start to disappear from coral reef , their absence can serve as an alarm bell for scientist to start pay attention , similar to the canary in a coal mine . but giant clam be endanger . the large clam in the world be face the threat of extinction , with more than 50 percent of the wild population severely deplete . and the ecological benefit of have giant clam on coral reef be likely to continue only if population be healthy , make their conservation paramount .     so I stand here today to give a voice to the giant clam , because I care a whole lot for these amazing animal , and they deserve to be care for . it be time for the giant clam to step out of their shell , and show the world that they , too , can be the hero of the ocean .     thank you very much .     ( applause )  
   it be the end of october in the mountain in austria . I be there on a field trip with my architecture student from zurich . and when we reach a high valley , I surprise they with the news that there be no hut or hotel book for the night . it be not a mistake . it be totally on purpose . the challenge be to build our own shelter with whatever we could find . and we all survive . it be cold , it be really tough ... and it be a great learning experience to discover that there be a lot of resource give by nature for free , and all that we need be our sensitivity to see they ... and our creativity to use they .     I find myself in a similar situation . when I be an architecture student about 13 year ago , I go to bangladesh to a remote village call rudrapur with the aim to design and build a school as my thesis project . I have live in that village before when I be 19 and a volunteer at dipshikha , a bangladeshi ngo for rural development . and what I have learn from they be that the most sustainable strategy for sustainable development be to cherish and to use your very own resource and potential , and not get dependent on external factor . and this be what I try to do with my architecture as well .     in term of suitable building material for my school , I do not have to look far . they be right under my foot : mud , earth , dirt , clay , however you call it ... and bamboo that be grow all around . electricity in remote bangladesh be rare , but we do not need it . we have human energy and the people be happy to have the work . tool be an issue , too , but we have these guy , water buffalos . we have also try a bit cow , but interestingly , they be too intelligent . they be always step in the hole of the previous round . they would not mix the mud , the straw —     ( laughter )     the sand , which be the ingredient in the wall . and except a small team of consultant like my partner for realization , eike roswag , and my basket - weaver cousin , emmanuel , it be all build by craftsman from the village . and this be the meti school after six month of construction .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     load - bear earth wall that really grind the school , and large bamboo structure that bring the lightness in . that be the classroom on the ground floor . attach to it be the cave . they be for reading , for snuggle , for solo work , for meditation , for play ... and the classroom on the top .     the child all sign with their name in bengali the door , and they do not only sign , they also help build the school . and I be sure you all have your hand in mud or clay before . it be wonderful to touch . I love it . the child love it . and can you imagine the feeling of a small boy or a girl or an illiterate day laborer stand in front of that school building and know that you build this out of the ordinary bamboo and just the dirt underneath your foot , use nothing but your hand ? that give such an enormous boost of trust and confidence in yourself and the community .     and in the material . especially mud have a very poor image . when we think of mud , we think of dirt — it be ugly , it be nondurable — and this be the image I want to change . in fact , it be the 11th rainy season for this school now , really harsh , horizontal monsoon rain , and the wall be stand strong .     ( applause )     so how do it work ? first rule , a good foundation that keep the wall dry from the ground , and second rule , a good roof that protect from the top , and third rule , erosion control . mud wall need speed breaker so that the rainwater can not run down the wall fast , and these speed breaker could be line of bamboo or stone or straw mix into the mud , just like a hill need tree or rock in order to prevent erosion . it work just the same way . and people always ask I if I have to add cement to the mud , and the answer be no . there be no stabilizer , no coating on these wall , only in the foundation . so this be the close - up of the wall after 10 rainy season , and as much as I grow a bit old , the wall get some wrinkle as well . the edge my not be as sharp as before , but it still look pretty good , and if it need repair , it be really easy to do . you just take the broken part , make it wet , and put it back on the wall , and it will look the same as before . wish that would work on I , too .     ( laughter )     yeah , and the great thing be , if an earth wall be not need anymore , it can go back to the ground it come from , turn into a garden , or get fully recycle without any loss of quality . there be no other material that can do this , and this be why mud be so excellent in term of environmental performance .     what about the economic sustainability ? when we build the school , I practically live on the construction site , and in the evening , I use to go with the worker to the market , and I could see how they spend their money . and they would buy the vegetable from their neighbor , they would get a new haircut or a new blouse from the tailor . and because the main part of the building budget be spend on craftsmanship , the school be not just a building , it become a real catalyst for local development , and that make I happy . if I have design the school in cement and steel , this money would have be export and lose for those family .     ( applause )     the building budget at that time be 35,000 euro — it be probably double by now — and this be a lot of money for that region , and especially because this money be work within the community and rotate fast , and not on the stock market . so when it come to the economic sustainability of my project , my main question be , who get the profit ?     how many of you in here have some experience live in a mud house ? chris anderson , where be your hand ?     ( laughter )     you ? ok .     yeah . it seem totally out of our focus , but approximately three billion people all around the planet be live in earth house , and it be a traditional building material in europe just as much as in africa .     strangely enough , mud be not consider worthy of be study at university ... so I bring the dirt to harvard ,     ( laughter )     precisely 60 ton of dirt right in front of the main facade of the graduate school of design . student and faculty roll up their sleeve , get their hand dirty and transform the front into a warm place for people to gather . child would climb the structure , skater would ride the ramp , student have lunch break , and it be particularly fascinating to see how many people be touch the wall , and we usually do not go around city caress our facade , right ?     ( laughter )     ( laughter )     of course , this be a small - scale project , but in term of awareness - building and in term of education , it be like an acupuncture trigger point . and in fact , in more and more country , load - bearing earthen structure be not allow to be build anymore although they be traditional and have last for hundred of year , and not because the material be weak , but because there be no architect and engineer who know how to deal with that material . so education on all level , for craftsman , engineer and architect , be really strongly need . equally important be technological development , like prefabrication develop by my colleague martin rauch , who be an austrian artist and expert in earthen structure . and he have create technology for rammed earth element , for prefabrication of rammed earth element that include insulation , wall heating and cooling and all sort of electrical fitting that can be layer to multistorie building , and this be important in order to scale up and in order to [ speed ] up the process , like in the ricola herb center in switzerland .     and finally , we need good build project that prove you can build with an ancient material in a very modern way . it be not a matter of how old a material be ; it be a matter of our creative ability to use it today . these , for example , be three hostel that I do in china in the village baoxi , about six hour by bus from shanghai . the outside shape be weave bamboo , and the inside core be stone and ram earth . and it be a traditional building material . even large part of the great wall of china have be build with rammed earth , but it be getting replace by concrete .     and this trend be happen very fast . within only a couple of year , china have consume more cement than the united states in the entire 20th century . and this trend of replace natural building material with material that require a lot of energy , that be energy - intensive , and that emit co2 be really clearly contribute to climate change . and we have alternative , such as mud , stone , timber , bamboo , earth , that be totally effective option for all sort of purpose .     this , for example , be an office building that we do for omicron electronic in austria . mud be healthy for the planet , but also for the human body , and the material be low - tech , but the performance be high - tech . the earth wall keep the highly sophisticated tool in the building safe by naturally regulate moisture .     and this wall in my own home be our humidfi . we love our six ton of dirt at home not only because it be healthy and sustainable . its archaic warmth be touch deep within .     my personal dream be to build a mud skyscraper right in manhattan .     ( laughter )     yeah .     ( applause )     and this dream be not so crazy if you think of the mud city of shibam in yemen that be build in the 16th century and have last now for 500 year . what be possible that long ago be possible today as well , and we can you all our technical know - how to these ancient material so that it meet our need and our dream .     all around we , and just below our foot ... be wonderful natural building material . let us use they . and I deeply believe our home , our work space , our city would become more healthy and sustainable and more humane and beautiful .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   today I want to confess something to you , but first of all I be go to ask you a couple of question . how many people here have child ? and how many of you be confident that you know how to bring up your child in exactly the right way ?     ( laughter )     ok , I do not see too many hand go up on that second one , and that be my confession , too . I 've get three boy ; they be three , nine and 12 . and like you , and like most parent , the honest truth be I have pretty much no idea what I be do . I want they to be happy and healthy in their life , but I do not know what I be suppose to do to make sure they be happy and healthy . there be so many book offer all kind of conflicting advice , it can be really overwhelming . so I 've spend most of their life just make it up as I go along . however , something change I a few year ago , when I come across a little secret that we have in britain . it be help I become more confident about how I bring up my own child , and it be reveal a lot about how we as a society can help all child . I want to share that secret with you today .     for the last 70 year , scientist in britain have be follow thousand of child through their life as part of an incredible scientific study . there be nothing quite like it anywhere else in the world . collect information on thousand of child be a really powerful thing to do , because it mean we can compare the one who say , do well at school or end up healthy or happy or wealthy as adult , and the one who struggle much more , and then we can sift through all the information we 've collect and try to work out why their life turn out different .     this british study — it be actually a kind of crazy story . so it all start back in 1946 , just a few month after the end of the war , when scientist want to know what it be like for a woman to have a baby at the time . they carry out this huge survey of mother and end up record the birth of nearly every baby bear in england , scotland and wale in one week . that be nearly 14,000 baby . the question they ask these woman be very different than the one we might ask today . they sound really old - fashioned now . they ask they thing like , " during pregnancy , do you get your full extra ration of a pint of milk a day ? " " how much do you spend on smock , corset , nightdress , knicker and brassiere ? " and this be my favorite one : " who look after your husband while you be in bed with this baby ? "     ( laughter )     now , this wartime study actually end up be so successful that scientist do it again . they record the birth of thousand of baby bear in 1958 and thousand more in 1970 . they do it again in the early 1990 , and again at the turn of the millennium . altogether , more than 70,000 child have be involve in these study across those five generation . they be call the british birth cohort , and scientist have go back and record more information on all of these people every few year ever since . the amount of information that be now be collect on these people be just completely mind - boggling . it include thousand of paper questionnaire and terabyte ' worth of computer datum . scientist have also build up a huge bank of tissue sample , which include lock of hair , nail clipping , baby tooth and dna . they 've even collect 9,000 placenta from some of the birth , which be now pickle in plastic bucket in a secure storage warehouse . this whole project have become unique — so , no other country in the world be track generation of child in quite this detail . these be some of the well - study people on the planet , and the datum have become incredibly valuable for scientist , generate well over 6,000 academic paper and book . but today I want to focus on just one finding — perhaps the most important discovery to come from this remarkable study . and it be also the one that speak to I personally , because it be about how to use science to do the good for our child .     so , let us get the bad news out of the way first . perhaps the big message from this remarkable study be this : do not be bear into poverty or into disadvantage , because if you be , you be far more likely to walk a difficult path in life . many child in this study be bear into poor family or into working - class family that have cramp home or other problem , and it be clear now that those disadvantaged child have be more likely to struggle on almost every score . they 've be more likely to do bad at school , to end up with bad job and to earn less money . now , maybe that sound really obvious , but some of the result have be really surprising , so child who have a tough start in life be also more likely to end up unhealthy as adult . they be more likely to be overweight , to have high blood pressure , and then decade down the line , more likely to have a fail memory , poor health and even to die early .     now , I talk about what happen later , but some of these difference emerge at a really shockingly early age . in one study , child who be grow up in poverty be almost a year behind the rich child on educational test , and that be by the age of just three . these type of difference have be find again and again across the generation . it mean that our early circumstance have a profound influence on the way that the rest of our life play out . and work out why that be be one of the most difficult question that we face today .     so there we have it . the first lesson for successful life , everyone , be this : choose your parent very carefully .     ( laughter )     do not be bear into a poor family or into a struggle family . now , I be sure you can see the small problem here . we can not choose our parent or how much they earn , but this british study have also strike a real note of optimism by show that not everyone who have a disadvantaged start end up in difficult circumstance . as you know , many people have a tough start in life , but they end up do very well on some measure nevertheless , and this study start to explain how .     so the second lesson be this : parent really matter . in this study , child who have engage , interested parent , one who have ambition for their future , be more likely to escape from a difficult start . it seem that parent and what they do be really , really important , especially in the first few year of life .     let I give you an example of that . in one study , scientist look at about 17,000 child who be bear in 1970 . they sift all the mountain of datum that they have collect to try to work out what allow the child who have have a difficult start in life to go on and do well at school nevertheless . in other word , which one beat the odd . the datum show that what matter more than anything else be parent . having engage , interested parent in those first few year of life be strongly link to child go on to do well at school later on . in fact , quite small thing that parent do be associate with good outcome for child . talk and listen to a child , respond to they warmly , teach they their letter and number , take they on trip and visit . read to child every day seem to be really important , too . so in one study , child whose parent be read to they daily when they be five and then show an interest in their education at the age of 10 , be significantly less likely to be in poverty at the age of 30 than those whose parent be not do those thing .     now , there be huge challenge with interpret this type of science . these study show that certain thing that parent do be correlate with good outcome for child , but we do not necessarily know those behavior cause the good outcome , or whether some other factor be get in the way . for example , we have to take gene into account , and that be a whole other talk in itself .     but scientist work with this british study be work really hard to get at cause , and this be one study I particularly love . in this one , they look at the bedtime routine of about 10,000 child bear at the turn of the millennium . be the child go to bed at regular time , or do they go to bed at different time during the week ? the datum show that those child who be go to bed at different time be more likely to have behavioral problem , and then those that switch to have regular bedtime often show an improvement in behavior , and that be really crucial , because it suggest it be the bedtime routine that be really help thing get well for those kid .     here be another one to think about . in this one , scientist look at child who be read for pleasure . that mean that they pick up a magazine , a picture book , a story book . the datum show that child who be read for pleasure at the age of five and 10 be more likely to go on in school well , on average , on school test later in their life . and not just test of reading , but test of spelling and math as well . this study try to control for all the confound factor , so it look at child who be equally intelligent and from the same social - class background , so it seem as if it be the reading which really help those child go on and score well on those school test later in their life .     now at the start , I say the first lesson from this study be not to be bear into poverty or into disadvantage , because those child tend to follow more difficult path in their life . but then I say that parenting matter , and that good parenting , if you can call it that , help child beat the odd and overcome some of those early disadvantage . so wait , do that actually mean , then , that poverty do not matter after all ? you could argue it do not matter if a child be bear poor — as long as their parent be good parent , they be go to do just fine . I do not believe that be true . this study show that poverty and parenting matter . and one study actually put figure on that , so it look at child grow up in persistent poverty and how well they be do at school . the datum show that even when their parent be do everything right — put they to bed on time and read to they every day and everything else — that only get those child so far . good parenting only reduce the educational gap between the rich and poor child by about 50 percent . now that mean that poverty leave a really last scar , and it mean that if we really want to ensure the success and well - being of the next generation , then tackle child poverty be an incredibly important thing to do .     now , what do all this mean for you and I ? be there lesson here we can all take home and use ? as a scientist and a journalist , I like to have some science to inform my parenting ... and I can tell you that when you be shout at your kid to go to bed on time , it really help to have the scientific literature on your side .     ( laughter )     and would not it be great to think that all we have to do to have happy , successful child be to talk to they , be interested in their future , put they to bed on time , and give they a book to read ? our job would be do .     now , as you can imagine , the answer be not quite as simple as that . for one thing , this study look at what happen to thousand and thousand of child on average , but that do not necessarily say what will help my child or your child or any individual child . in the end , each of our child be go to walk their own path , and that be partly define by the gene they inherit and of course all the experience they have through their life , include their interaction with we , their parent .     I will tell you what I do after I learn all this . it be a bit embarrassing . I realize I be so busy work , and ironically , learn and write about this incredible study of british child , that there be day when I hardly even speak to my own british child . so at home , we introduce talk time , which be just 15 minute at the end of the day when we talk and listen to the boy . I try well now to ask they what they do today , and to show that I value what they do at school . of course , I make sure they always have a book to read . I tell they I be ambitious for their future , and I think they can be happy and do great thing . I do not know that any of that will make a difference , but I be pretty confident it will not do they any harm , and it might even do they some good .     ultimately , if we want happy child , all we can do be listen to the science , and of course , listen to our child themselves .     thank you .  
   I want we to start by think about this device , the phone that be very likely in your pocket right now . over 40 percent of americans   check their phone within five minute of wake up every morning . and then they look at it another 50 time during the day . grownup consider this device to be a necessity .     but now I want you to imagine it in the hand of a three - year - old , and as a society , we get anxious . parent be very worried that this device be go to stunt their child 's social growth ; that it be go to keep they from get up and move ; that somehow , this be go to disrupt childhood . so , I want to challenge this attitude . I can envision a future where we would be excited to see a preschooler interact with a screen . these screen can get kid up and move even more . they have the power to tell we more about what a child be learn than a standardized test can . and here be the really crazy thought : I believe that these screen have the power to prompt more real - life conversation between kid and their parent .     now , I be perhaps an unlikely champion for this cause . I study child 's literature because I be go to work with kid and book . but about 20 year ago , I have an experience that shift my focus . I be help lead a research study about preschooler and website . and I walk in and be assign a three - year - old name maria . maria have actually never see a computer before . so the first thing I have to do be teach she how to use the mouse , and when I open up the screen , she move it across the screen , and she stop on a character name x the owl . and when she do that , the owl lift his wing and wave at she . maria drop the mouse , push back from the table , leap up and start wave frantically back at he . her connection to that character be visceral . this be not a passive screen experience . this be a human experience . and it be exactly appropriate for a three - year - old .     I 've now work at pbs kid for more than 15 year , and my work there be focus on harness the power of technology as a positive in child 's life . I believe that as a society , we be miss a big opportunity . we be let our fear and our skepticism about these device hold we back from realize their potential in our child 's life .     fear about kid and technology be nothing new ; we 've be here before . over 50 year ago , the debate be rage about the newly dominant medium : the television . that box in the living room ? it might be separate kid from one another . it might keep they away from the outside world . but this be the moment when fred rogers , the long - run host of " mister rogers ' neighborhood , " challenge society to look at television as a tool , a tool that could promote emotional growth . here be what he do : he look out from the screen , and he hold a conversation , as if he be speak to each child individually about feeling . and then he would pause and let they think about they . you can see his influence across the medium landscape today , but at the time , this be revolutionary . he shift the way we look at television in the life of child .     today it be not just one box . kid be surround by device . and I be also a parent — I understand this feeling of anxiety . but I want we to look at three common fear that parent have , and see if we can shift our focus to the opportunity that be in each of they .     so . fear number one : " screen be passive . this be go to keep our kid from get up and move . " chris kratt and martin kratt be zoologist brother who host a show about animal call " wild kratt . " and they approach the pbs team to say , " can we do something with those camera that be build into every device now ? could those camera capture a very natural kid play pattern — pretend to be animal ? "     so we start with bat . and when kid come in to play this game , they love see themselves on - screen with wing . but my favorite part of this , when the game be over and we turn off the screen ? the kid keep be bat . they keep fly around the room , they keep veer leave and right to catch mosquito . and they remember thing . they remember that bat fly at night . and they remember that when bat sleep , they hang upside down and fold their wing in . this game definitely get kid up and move . but also , now when kid go outside , do they look at a bird and think , " how do a bird fly differently than I fly when I be a bat ? " the digital technology prompt embody learn that kid can now take out into the world .     fear number two : " play game on these screen be just a waste of time . it be go to distract child from their education . " game developer know that you can learn a lot about a player 's skill by look at the back - end datum : where do a player pause ? where do they make a few mistake before they find the right answer ? my team want to take that tool set and apply it to academic learning .     our producer in boston , wgbh , create a series of curious george game focus on math . and researcher come in and have 80 preschooler play these game . they then give all 80 of those preschooler a standardized math test . we could see early on that these game be actually help kid understand some key skill . but our partner at ucla want we to dig deeply . they focus on datum analysis and student assessment . and they want to take that back - end game - play datum and see if they could use it to predict a child 's math score . so they make a neural net — they essentially train the computer to use this datum , and here be the result . this be a subset of the child 's standardized math score . and this be the computer 's prediction of each child 's score , base on play some curious george game . the prediction be astonishingly accurate , especially consider the fact that these game be not build for assessment . the team that do this study believe that game like these can teach we more about a child 's cognitive learning than a standardized test can . what if game could reduce testing time in the classroom ? what if they could reduce testing anxiety ? how could they give teacher snapshot of insight to help they well focus their individualized learning ?     so the third fear I want to address be the one that I think be often the big . and that be this : " these screen be isolate I from my child . " let us play out a scenario . let us say that you be a parent , and you need 25 minute of uninterrupted time to get dinner ready . and in order to do that , you hand a tablet to your three - year - old . now , this be a moment where you probably feel very guilty about what you just do .     but now imagine this : twenty minute later , you receive a text message . on that cell phone that be always within arm 's reach . and it say : " alex just match five rhyme word . ask he to play this game with you . can you think of a word that rhyme with ' cat ' ? or how about ' ball ' ? " in our study , when parent receive simple tip like these , they feel empower . they be so excited to play these game at the dinner table with their kid . and the kid love it , too . not only do it feel like magic that their parent know what they have be play , kid love to play game with their parent . just the act of talk to kid about their medium can be incredibly powerful .     last summer , texas tech university publish a study that the show " daniel tiger 's neighborhood " could promote the development of empathy among child . but there be a really important catch to this study : the great benefit be only when parent talk to kid about what they watch . neither just watch nor just talk about it be enough ; it be the combination that be key . so when I read this study , I start think about how rarely parent of preschooler actually talk to kid about the content of what they be play and what they be watch .     and so I decide to try it with my four - year - old . I say , " be you play a car game early today ? " and benjamin perk up and say , " yes ! and do you see that I make my car out of a pickle ? it be really hard to open the trunk . "     ( laughter )     this hilarious conversation about what be fun in the game and what could have be well continue all the way to school that morning .     I be not here to suggest to you that all digital medium be great for kid . there be legitimate reason for we to be concerned about the current state of child 's content on these screen . and it be right for we to be think about balance : where do screen fit against all the other thing that a child need to do to learn and to grow ? but when we fixate on our fear about it , we forget a really major point , and that be , that kid be live in the same world that we live in , the world where the grownup check their phone more than 50 time a day .     screen be a part of child 's life . and if we pretend that they be not , or if we get overwhelmed by our fear , kid be never go to learn how and why to use they . what if we start raise our expectation for this medium ? what if we start talk to kid regularly about the content on these screen ? what if we start look for the positive impact that this technology can have in our child 's life ? that be when the potential of these tool can become a reality .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   when be I be 21 year old , I have all this physics homework . physics homework require take break , and wikipedia be relatively new , so I take a lot of break there . I keep go back to the same article , read they again and again , on glacier , antarctica and greenland . how cool would it be to visit these place and what would it take to do so ? well , here we be on a repurpose air force cargo plane operate by nasa fly over the greenland ice sheet . there be a lot to see here , but there be more that be hide , wait to be uncover . what the wikipedia article do not tell I be that there be liquid water hide inside the ice sheet , because we do not know that yet .     I do learn on wikipedia that the greenland ice sheet be huge , the size of mexico , and its ice from top to bottom be two mile thick . but it be not just static . the ice flow like a river downhill towards the ocean . as it flow around bend , it deform and crack .     I get to study these amazing ice dynamic , which be locate in one of the most remote physical environment remain on earth . to work in glaciology right now be like get in on the ground floor at facebook in the 2000s .     ( laughter )     our capability to fly airplane and satellite over the ice sheet be revolutionize glaciology . it be just start to do for science what the smartphone have do for social medium .     the satellite be report a wealth of observation that be reveal new hide fact about the ice sheet continuously . for instance , we have observation of the size of the greenland ice sheet every month go back to 2002 . you can look towards the bottom of the screen here to see the month and the year go forward . you can see that some area of the ice sheet melt or lose ice in the summer . other area experience snowfall or gain ice back in the winter . this seasonal cycle , though , be eclipse by an overall rate of mass loss that would have stun a glaciologist 50 year ago . we never think that an ice sheet could lose mass into the ocean this quickly . since these measurement begin in 2002 , the ice sheet have lose so much ice that if that water be pile up on our small continent , it would drown australia knee - deep . how be this possible ? well , under the ice lie the bedrock . we use radar to image the hill , valley , mountain and depression that the ice flow over . hide under the ice sheet be channel the size of the grand canyon that funnel ice and water off of greenland and into the ocean .     the reason that radar can reveal the bedrock be that ice be entirely transparent to radar . you can do an experiment . go home and put an ice cube in the microwave . it will not melt , because microwave , or radar , pass straight through the ice without interact . if you want to melt your ice cube , you have to get it wet , because water heat up easily in the microwave . that be the whole principle the microwave oven be design around . radar can see water . and radar have reveal a vast pool of liquid water hide under my colleague olivia , seven story beneath her foot . here , she be use a pump to bring some of that water back to the ice sheet 's surface .     just six year ago , we have no idea this glaci aquifer exist . the aquifer form when snow melt in the summer sun and trickle downward . it puddle up in huge pool . from there , the snow act as an igloo , insulate this water from the cold and the wind above . so the water can stay hidden in the ice sheet in liquid form year after year . the question be , what happen next ? do the water stay there forever ? it could . or do it find a way out to reach the global ocean ? one possible way for the water to reach the bedrock and from there the ocean be a crevasse , or a crack in the ice . when crack fill with water , the weight of the water force they deeply and deep . this be how fracking work to extract natural gas from deep within the earth . pressurize fluid fracture rock . all it take be a crack to get start .     well , we recently discover that there be crack available in the greenland ice sheet near this glaci aquifer . you can fly over most of the greenland ice sheet and see nothing , no crack , no feature on the surface , but as this helicopter fly towards the coast , the path that water would take on its quest to flow downhill , one crack appear , then another and another . be these crack fill with liquid water ? and if so , how deep do they take that water ? can they take it to the bedrock and the ocean ? to answer these question , we need something beyond remote sense datum . we need numeric model .     I write numeric model that run on supercomputer . a numeric model be simply a set of equation that work together to describe something . it can be as simple as the next number in a sequence — one , three , five , seven — or it can be a more complex set of equation that predict the future base on know condition in the present . in our case , what be the equation for how ice crack ? well , engineer already have a very good understanding of how aluminum , steel and plastic fracture under stress . it be an important problem in our society . and it turn out that the engineering equation for how material fracture be not that different from my physics homework . so I borrow they , adapt they for ice , and then I have a numeric model for how a crevasse can fracture when fill with water from the aquifer . this be the power of math . it can help we understand real process in our world .     I 'll show you now the result of my numeric model , but first I should point out that the crevasse be about a thousand time narrow than it be deep , so in the main panel here , we 've zoom in to well see the detail . you can look to the small panel on the right to see the true scale for how tall and skinny the crevasse be .     as the aquifer water flow into the crevasse , some of it refreeze in the negative 15 degree celsius ice . that be about as cold as your kitchen freezer . but this loss can be overcome if the flow rate in from the glaci aquifer be high enough . in our case , it be , and the aquifer water drive the crevasse all the way to the base of the ice sheet a thousand meter below . from there , it have a clear path to reach the ocean . so the aquifer water be a part of the three millimeter per year of sea level rise that we experience as a global society .     but there be more : the aquifer water might be punch above its weight . the ice flow in complex way . in some place , the ice flow very fast . there tend to be water at the base of the ice sheet here . in other place , not so fast . usually , there be not water present at the base there .     now that we know the aquifer water be get to the base of the ice sheet , the next question be : be it make the ice itself flow fast into the ocean ? we be try to uncover these mystery hide inside the greenland ice sheet so that we can well plan for the sea level rise it hold . the amount of ice that greenland have lose since 2002 be just a small fraction of what that ice sheet hold .     ice sheet be immense , powerful machine that operate on long timescale . in the next 80 year , global sea level will rise at least 20 centimeter , perhaps as much as one meter , and maybe more . our understanding of future sea level rise be good , but our projection have a wide range . it be our role as glaciologist and scientist to narrow these uncertainty .     how much sea level rise be come , and how fast will it get here ? we need to know how much and how fast , so the world and its community can plan for the sea level rise that be come .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   after decade of research and billion of dollar spend in clinical trial , we still have a problem with cancer drug delivery . we still give patient chemotherapy , which be so non - specific that even though it kill the cancer cell , it kind of kill the rest of your body , too . and yes , we have develop more selective drug , but it be still a challenge to get they into the tumor , and they end up accumulate in the other organ as well or pass through your urine , which be a total waste . and field like mine have emerge where we try to encapsulate these drug to protect they as they travel through the body . but these modification cause problem that we make more modification to fix .     so what I be really try to say be we need a well drug delivery system . and I propose , rather than use solely human design , why not use nature 's ?     immune cell be these versatile vehicle that travel throughout our body , patrol for sign of disease and arrive at a wound mere minute after injury . so I ask you guy : if immune cell be already travel to place of injury or disease in our body , why not add an extra passenger ? why not use immune cell to deliver drug to cure some of our big problem in disease ?     I be a biomedical engineer , and I want to tell you guy a story about how I use immune cell to target one of the large problem in cancer . do you know that over 90 percent of cancer death can be attribute to its spread ? so if we can stop these cancer cell from go from the primary tumor to a distant site , we can stop cancer right in its track and give people more of their life back .     to do this special mission , we decide to deliver a nanoparticle make of lipid , which be the same material that compose your cell membrane . and we 've add two special molecule . one be call e - selectin , which act as a glue that bind the nanoparticle to the immune cell . and the second one be call trail . trail be a therapeutic drug that kill cancer cell but not normal cell . now , when you put both of these together , you have a mean kill machine on wheel .     to test this , we run an experiment in a mouse . so what we do be we inject the nanoparticle , and they bind almost immediately to the immune cell in the bloodstream . and then we inject the cancer cell to mimic a process through which cancer cell spread throughout our body . and we find something very exciting . we find that in our treat group , over 75 percent of the cancer cell we initially inject be dead or die , in comparison to only around 25 percent . so just imagine : these few amount of cell be available to actually be able to spread to a different part of the body . and this be only after two hour of treatment .     our result be amazing , and we have some pretty interesting press . my favorite title be actually , " sticky ball may stop the spread of cancer . "     ( laughter )     I can not tell you just how smug my male colleague be , know that their sticky ball might one day cure cancer .     ( laughter )     but I can tell you they make some pretty , pretty , exciting , pretty ballsy t - shirt .     this be also my first experience talk to patient where they ask how soon our therapy would be available . and I keep these story with I to remind I of the importance of the science , the scientist and the patient .     now , our fast - act result be pretty interesting , but we still have one linger question : can our sticky ball , our particle actually attach to the immune cell , actually stop the spread of cancer ? so we go to our animal model , and we find three important part . our primary tumor be small in our treat animal , there be few cell in circulation , and there be little to no tumor burden in the distant organ .     now , this be not just a victory for we and our sticky ball . this be also a victory to I in drug delivery , and it represent a paradigm shift , a revolution — to go from just use drug , just inject they and hope they go to the right place in the body , to use immune cell as special delivery driver in your body . for this example , we use two molecule , e - selectin and trail , but really , the possibility of drug you can use be endless .     and I talk about cancer , but where disease go , so do immune cell . so this could be use for any disease . imagine use immune cell to deliver crucial wound - heal agent after a spinal cord injury , or use immune cell to deliver drug past the blood - brain barrier to treat parkinson 's or alzheimer 's disease .     these be the idea that excite I about science the most . and from where I stand , I see so much promise and opportunity .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be often ask why I do art , what do I want to say with my art photography , and what be the use of it ? once in a while I start to worry how to actually measure the impact from the art like we do with medicine or technology , where we can see the result and calculate it . then I would finally be able to explain to my mother my art with real number . but my art be so far from metric , and moreover , my photography be widely expose the theme of escapism .     my theory be that all of we struggle sometimes to escape in order to analyze our reality , appreciate it or change . I do not work with daily life as it be , and I be not a documentary photographer in the common sense . but I be a documentary photographer in a different sense . I document dream . I work with daily life as it could be , as I imagine it . I be a daydreamer , but at the same time I love thing that be authentic and deal with our innermost nature , which I would never want to escape from . I adore complicated personality , and real life inspire I to create my image . real life inspire our escape , and sometimes that escape be very needed .     I believe hero be not create easily , and I choose to work with individual who be survivor and face everyday routine that be not always full of color , people who be on their way to a well life , fight against life circumstance .     why do I choose people like that for my model ? because I 've be in that position myself , when I have to learn how to survive in real life . I be a student live abroad in london . I be work at two place at the same time as a waitress . obviously that be not my dream job , but I decide to play a game where I imagine that I be take a role in a film , and in the film I be a waitress , and I need to act great . I use to dye my hair and brow to gingerette , I change my hair to curly perm , I lose weight and make myself believe I be just a character act in a film . that be not forever , that be all just temporary . that help I a lot . it motivate I to change my life and take a hard time as a game . now , as an artist , I be create different life for my model in order to give they the experience of be someone else in reality . through the photographic process , all of my model become like silent movie actor . they be capture at the moment when they believe in be someone else entirely .     in order to create a new reality in its entirety , I physically create every single thing in my work , sometimes from outfit to the stage . because I work with analogue , and I do not make any digital manipulation to my photograph , I need everything to take place in reality , in spite of the fact that nowadays , digitally , you can create pretty much everything . I do not like this path . even if that reach perfection , I see the beauty in authenticity of making , and that be impossible without flaw . a digitally manipulate photograph be not true for I . it do not capture anything real . it be not experienced , not motivate . it be like , instead of go travel , you look at someone else 's travel photograph .     what I find so exciting be the ability to make people 's dream of be someone else a reality . that be like a drug which push I to keep work , even without metric .     one of my model have always dream of be see as a warrior , but she be not able to do sport because of her health problem . half a year ago , she pass away from heart disease at the age of 22 . but two day before her death , the image we spend month work on together of she as a warrior she dream of become be publish at a large exhibition in milan by vogue magazine . all her life be about overcome . before she die , she have know that thousand of people see her image from the land of escapism and believe in she as a brave and fearless warrior .     for my work , I invite people to play a game like we all use to as child when we pretend to be someone else and that process make we really happy . to my mind it be important for grown - up . we need these transformation to enact this in the name of art . it give we the very real feeling of be important and powerful in order to influence our reality . I know this from my own personal experience . I have have so many version of myself through my self - portrait that I 've be many different character .     be someone else in the land of escapism do not exactly give we number that we can gauge , but it be like a real lose form of magic which exist but can not be measure . there be a unique power in art to transform and lift our limit . art create what I call a conjured life , which help our existence and push , motivate and inspire we to dwell and express ourselves without metric or calculation .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   johnny meet donna ,     ( piano )     and they fall in love ,     but have no idea     what love really be .     so they try their good     to make each other smile .     but while learn themselves ,     they would have a child .     but with no time to think the whole thing through ,     little time to prepare ,     it get tough to provide for he     and give he love and care .     how , how , how , how , how do I ? when and where ?     be question they both often ask god .     life be full of twist , twist .     life be full of twirl , twirl , t - twirl , twirl .     yeah , it be the weight of the world ,     it flip you upside down     when you be young , when you be old     it just spin out of control , oh .     spin out of control , so ...     hold on     because you 'll never know .     ( piano )     johnny and donna     slowly recognize that for the baby 's future ,     they plan two different life .     donna want a family .     she want to do it right ,     make johnny 's house a home .     she want to be a wife .     johnny be a dreamer .     he have to move around .     yeah , he would be there for his child ,     but would not settle down .     how , how , how , how , how do I ? when and where ?     be question they both often ask god .     life be full of twist , twist .     life be full of twirl , twirl , t - twirl , twirl .     yeah , it be the weight of the world .     it be whirlwind and girlfriend ,     toy and boyfriend , friend and frenchman ,     war , peace , impeachment , gentleman ,     lady , sunday , shady mistake ,     and peach ring ,     black and bleach stain .     do not forget wasps and bee sting , oh .     whether you be johnny or donna ,     or neither of the two , just try to make the good of what be give to you .     ha , ha , ha , ha .     ha , ha , ha , ha .     ha , ha , ha , ha .     ( applause )     thank you .     ( applause )     I do not know if you can tell , but I love music .     ( laughter )     I love to sing . and it be because I feel like it be the fast - track route to the heart . I feel like when I sing , I get to connect with each one of you . and it be not because of the tune , it be not because of the lyric , it be not because of the tempo or the pitch . it be because , somehow , we all understand music . it be a universal language . imagine : one language that we can all understand . we might not all speak it as fluently as each other , but we can definitely understand it .     and so , I speak it , and my job as the singer or the storyteller be to fill in the blank with technicolor . I get to tell your secret . I get to explain how someone else be feel so that whoever else be listen can finally understand . I think that with music , we have a bit of a superpower . we get to explain , we get to express , we get to move , we get to ostracize , we get to accompany . we get to do all these different thing simply by use a tune . and that be the way I think we can change thing . that be the tool I 've be give to help to change thing .     and think , if we all understand that we have a little bit of tune in our heart — a little bit of lyrical prowess , shall we say , we get to move thing forward because we can explain use a language that we can all understand . it be undeniable .     I have another song here . and we all know it very , very well . and I wonder — I be go to test you all . let us see if you can join I . this be the test to see if you understand this .     ( singing ) lookin ' out on the morning rain —     ( audience sing next note )     you see ?     ( laughter )     we all understand it . we all know something . we all be connect by a piece of music somewhere . we might not all be connect by the same thing , but music be the one thing I believe — storytelle in the music be something that connect we all . do not matter where we be from . so maybe , maybe it be one of the thing we can use to move we forward into that future of ours . just maybe . I hope you enjoy this next one .     ( pianist play " natural woman " )     lookin ' out on the morning rain ,     I use to feel so uninspired .     and when I know I have to face another day ,     lord , it make feel so tired .     before the day I meet you ,     life be so unkind ,     but you be the reason for my peace of mind .     'cause you make I feel ,     you make I feel ,     you make I feel like a natural woman .     when my soul be in the lost and find ,     you come along to claim it .     I do not know just what be wrong with I ,     ' til your kiss help I name it .     now I be no long doubtful of what I be live for ,     and if I make you happy , I do not need to do more .     'cause you make I feel ,     you make I feel ,     you make I feel like a natural woman .     oh , baby what you do to I —     you make I feel so good inside .     and I just wanna be close to you ,     you make I feel so alive .     'cause you make I feel ,     you make I feel ,     you make I feel like a natural woman .     you make I feel ,     you make I feel ,     you make I feel like a natural woman .     oh —     ( applause )     jason webb .     thank you very much .  
   cyndi stiver : so , future of storytelle . before we do the future , let us talk about what be never go to change about storytelle .     shonda rhime : what be never go to change . obviously , I think good story be never go to change , the need for people to gather together and exchange their story and to talk about the thing that feel universal , the idea that we all feel a compelling need to watch story , to tell story , to share story — sort of the gathering around the campfire to discuss the thing that tell each one of we that we be not alone in the world . those thing to I be never go to change . that essence of storytelling be never go to change .     cs : ok . in preparation for this conversation , I check in with susan lyne , who be run abc entertainment when you be work on " grey 's anatomy " —     sr : yes .     cs : and she say that there be this indelible memory she have of your casting process , where without discuss it with any of the executive , you get people come in to read for your script , and every one of they be the full range of humanity , you do not type anyone in any way , and that it be completely surprising . so she say , in addition to retrain the studio executive , you also , she feel , and I think this be — I agree , retrain the expectation of the american tv audience . so what else do the audience not yet realize that it need ?     sr : what else do it not yet realize ? well , I mean , I do not think we be anywhere near there yet . I mean , we be still in a place in which we be far , far behind what look like the real world in actuality . I be not bring in a bunch of actor who look very different from one another simply because I be try to make a point , and I be not try to do anything special . it never occur to I that that be new , different or weird . I just bring in actor because I think they be interesting and to I , the idea that it be completely surprising to everybody — I do not know that for a while . I just think : these be the actor I want to see play these part . I want to see what they look like if they read . we 'll see what happen . so I think the interesting thing that happen be that when you look at the world through another lens , when you be not the person normally in charge of thing , it just come out a different way .     cs : so you now have this big machine that you run , as a titan — as you know , last year when she give her talk — she be a titan . so what do you think be go to happen as we go on ? there be a huge amount of money involve in produce these show . while the tool of make story have go and get greatly democratize , there be still this large distribution : people who rent network , who rent the audience to advertiser and make it all pay . how do you see the business model change now that anyone can be a storyteller ?     sr : I think it be change every day . I mean , the rapid , rapid change that be happen be amazing . and I feel — the panic be palpable , and I do not mean that in a bad way . I think it be kind of exciting . the idea that there be sort of an equalizer happen , that sort of mean that anybody can make something , be wonderful . I think there be some scary in the idea that you can not find the good work now . there be so much work out there . I think there be something like 417 drama on television right now at any give time in any give place , but you can not find they . you can not find the good one . so there be a lot of bad stuff out there because everybody can make something . it be like if everybody paint a painting . you know , there be not that many good painter . but find the good story , the good show , be hard and hard and hard . because if you have one tiny show over here on amc and one tiny show over here over there , find where they be become much hard . so I think that ferret out the gem and find out who make the great webisode and who make this , it be — I mean , think about the poor critic who now be spend 24 hour a day trap in their home watch everything . it be not an easy job right now . so the distribution engine be get more and more vast , but find the good programming for everybody in the audience be get hard . and unlike the news , where everything be getting winnow down to just who you be , television seem to be get — and by television I mean anything you can watch , television show on — seem to be get wide and wide and wide . and so anybody be make story , and the genius be sometimes hide . but it be go to be hard to find , and at some point that will collapse . people keep talk about peak tv . I do not know when that be go to happen . I think at some point it 'll collapse a little bit and we 'll , sort of , come back together . I do not know if it will be network television . I do not know if that model be sustainable .     cs : what about the model that amazon and netflix be throw a lot of money around right now .     sr : that be true . I think it be an interesting model . I think there be something exciting about it . for content creator , I think there be something exciting about it . for the world , I think there be something exciting about it . the idea that there be program now that can be in multiple language with character from all over the world that be appeal and come out for everybody at the same time be exciting . I mean , I think the international sense that television can now take on make sense to I , that programming can now take on . television so much be make for , like — here be our american audience . we make these show , and then they shove they out into the world and hope for the good , as oppose to really think about the fact that america be not it . I mean , we love ourselves and everything , but it be not i. and we should be take into account the fact that there be all of these other place in the world that we should be interested in while we be tell story . it make the world small . I do not know . I think it push forward the idea that the world be a universal place , and our story become universal thing . we stop be other .     cs : you 've pioneer , as far as I can see , interesting way to launch new show , too . I mean , when you launch " scandal " in 2012 , there be this amazing groundswell of support on twitter the like of which nobody have see before . do you have any other trick up your sleeve when you launch your next one ? what do you think will happen in that regard ?     sr : we do have some interesting idea . we have a show call " still star - cross " come out this summer . we have some interesting idea for that . I be not sure if we be go to be able to do they in time . I think they be fun . but the idea that we would live - tweet our show be really just we think that would be fun . we do not realize that the critic would start to live - tweet along with we . but the fan — get people to be a part of it , make it more of a campfire — you know , when you be all on twitter together and you be all talk together , it be more of a shared experience , and find other way to make that possible and find other way to make people feel engage be important .     cs : so when you have all those different people make story and only some of they be go to break through and get that audience somehow , how do you think storyteller will get pay ?     sr : I actually have be struggle with this concept as well . be it go to be a subscriber model ? be people go to say , like , I be go to watch this particular person 's show , and that be how we be go to do it ?     cs : I think we should buy a passport to shondaland . right ?     sr : I do not know about that , but yeah . that be a lot more work for I . I do think that there be go to be different way , but I do not know necessarily . I mean , I 'll be honest and say a lot of content creator be not necessarily interested in be distributor , mainly because what I dream of do be create content . I really love to create content . I want to get pay for it and I want to get pay the money that I deserve to get pay for it , and there be a hard part in find that . but I also want it to be make possible for , you know , the people who work with I , the people who work for I , everybody to sort of get pay in a way , and they be all make a living . how it gets distribute be get hard and hard .     cs : how about the many new tool , you know , vr , ar ... I find it fascinating that you can not really binge - watch , you can not fast - forward in those thing . what do you see as the future of those for storytelle ?     sr : I spend a lot of time in the past year just explore those , get lot of demonstration and pay attention . I find they fascinating , mainly because I think that — I think most people think of they for gaming , I think most people think of they for thing like action , and I think that there be a sense of intimacy that be very present in those thing , the idea that — picture this , you can sit there and have a conversation with fitz , or at least sit there while fitz talk to you , president fitzgerald grant iii , while he talk to you about why he be make a choice that he make , and it be a very heartfelt moment . and instead of you watch a television screen , you be sit there next to he , and he be have this conversation . now , you fall in love with the man while he be do it from a television screen . imagine sit next to he , or be with a character like huck who be about to execute somebody . and instead of have a scene where , you know , he be talk to another character very rapidly , he go into a closet and turn to you and tell you , you know , what be go to happen and why he be afraid and nervous . it be a little more like theater , and I be not sure it would work , but I be fascinating by the concept of something like that and what that would mean for an audience . and to get to play with those idea would be interesting , and I think , you know , for my audience , the people who watch my show , which be , you know , woman 12 to 75 , there be something interesting in there for they .     cs : and how about the input of the audience ? how interested be you in the thing where the audience can actually go up to a certain point and then decide , oh wait , I be go to choose my own adventure . I be go to run off with fitz or I be go to run off with —     sr : oh , the choose- your - own - adventure story . I have a hard time with those , and not necessarily because I want to be in control of everything , but because when I be watch television or I be watch a movie , I know for a fact that a story be not as good when I have control over exactly what be go to happen to somebody else 's character . you know , if I could tell you exactly what I want to happen to walter white , that be great , but the story be not the same , and it be not as powerful . you know , if I be in charge of how " the soprano " end , then that be lovely and I have an ending that be nice and satisfying , but it be not the same story and it be not the same emotional impact .     cs : I can not stop imagine what that might be . sorry , you be lose I for a minute .     sr : but what be wonderful be I do not get to imagine it , because vince have his own ending , and it make it really powerful to know that somebody else have tell . you know , if you could decide that , you know , in " jaw , " the shark win or something , it do not do what it need to do for you . the story be the story that be tell , and you can walk away angry and you can walk away debate and you can walk away argue , but that be why it work . that be why it be art . otherwise , it be just a game , and game can be art , but in a very different way .     cs : gamer who actually sell the right to sit there and comment on what be happen , to I that be more community than storytelle .     sr : and that be its own form of campfire . I do not discount that as a form of storytelling , but it be a group form , I suppose .     cs : all right , what about the super - super — the fact that everything be get short , short , short . and , you know , snapchat now have something it call show that be one minute long .     sr : it be interesting . part of I think it sound like commercial . I mean , it do — like , sponsor by . but part of I also get it completely . there be something really wonderful about it . if you think about a world in which most people be watch television on their phone , if you think about a place like india , where most of the input be come in and that be where most of the product be come in , short make sense . if you can charge people more for short period of content , some distributor have figure out a way to make a lot more money . if you be make content , it cost less money to make it and put it out there . and , by the way , if you be 14 and have a short attention span , like my daughter , that be what you want to see , that be what you want to make , that be how it work . and if you do it right and it actually feel like narrative , people will hang on for it no matter what you do .     cs : I be glad you raise your daughter , because I be wonder how be they go to consume entertainment , and also not just entertainment , but news , too . when they be not — I mean , the algorithmic robot overlord be go to feed they what they 've already do . how do you think we will correct for that and make people well - round citizen ?     sr : well , I and how I correct for it be completely different than how somebody else might do it .     cs : feel free to speculate .     sr : I really do not know how we be go to do it in the future . I mean , my poor child have be the subject of all of my experiment . we be still do what I call " amish summer " where I turn off all electronic and pack you all their computer and stuff and watch they scream for a while until they settle down into , like , an electronic - free summer . but honestly , it be a very hard world in which now , as grow - up , we be so interested in watch our own thing , and we do not even know that we be be feed , sometimes , just our own opinion . you know , the way it be work now , you be watch a feed , and the feed be be correct so that you be only get your own opinion and you be feel more and more right about yourself . so how do you really start to discern ? it be get a little bit disturbing . so maybe it 'll overcorrect , maybe it 'll all explode , or maybe we 'll all just become — I hate to be negative about it , but maybe we 'll all just become more idiotic .     ( cyndi laughs )     cs : yeah , can you picture any corrective that you could do with script , fictional work ?     sr : I think a lot about the fact that television have the power to educate people in a powerful way , and when you be watch television — for instance , they do study about medical show . I think it be 87 percent , 87 percent of people get most of their knowledge about medicine and medical fact from medical show , much more so than they do from their doctor , than from article . so we work really hard to be accurate , and every time we make a mistake , I feel really guilty , like we be go to do something bad , but we also give a lot of good medical information . there be so many other way to give information on those show . people be be entertain and maybe they do not want to read the news , but there be a lot of way to give fair information out on those show , not in some creepy , like , we be go to control people 's mind way , but in a way that be sort of very interesting and intelligent and not about push one side 's version or the other , like , give out the truth . it would be strange , though , if television drama be how we be give the news .     cs : it would be strange , but I gather a lot of what you 've write as fiction have become prediction this season ?     sr : you know , " scandal " have be very disturbing for that reason . we have this show that be about politic go mad , and basically the way we 've always tell the show — you know , everybody pay attention to the paper . we read everything . we talk about everything . we have lot of friend in washington . and we would always sort of do our show as a speculation . we would sit in the room and think , what would happen if the wheel come off the bus and everything go crazy ? and that be always great , except now it feel like the wheel be come off the bus and thing be actually go crazy , so the thing that we be speculate be really come true . I mean , our season this year be go to end with the russians control the american election , and we would write it , we would plan for it , it be all there , and then the russians be suspect of be involve in the american election and we suddenly have to change what we be go to do for our season . I walk in and I be like , " that scene where our mystery woman start speak russian ? we have to fix that and figure out what we be go to do . " that just come from extrapolate out from what we think be go to happen , or what we think be crazy .     cs : that be great . so where else in we or elsewhere in the world do you look ? who be do interesting storytelle right now ?     sr : I do not know , there be a lot of interesting stuff out there . obviously british television be always amazing and always do interesting thing . I do not get to watch a lot of tv , mainly because I be busy work . and I pretty much try not to watch very much television at all , even american television , until I be do with a season , because thing start to creep into my head otherwise . I start to wonder , like , why can not our character wear crown and talk about be on a throne ? it get crazy . so I try not to watch much until the season be over . but I do think that there be a lot of interesting european television out there . I be at the international emmys and look around and see the stuff that they be show , and I be kind of fascinated . there be some stuff I want to watch and check out .     cs : can you imagine — I know that you do not spend a lot of time think about tech stuff , but you know how a few year ago we have someone here at ted talk about see , wear google glass and see your tv show essentially in your eye ? do you ever fantasize when , you know — the little girl who sit on the pantry floor in your parent ' house , do you ever imagine any other medium ? or would you now ?     sr : any other medium . for storytelle , other than book ? I mean , I grow up want to be toni morrison , so no . I mean , I do not even imagine television . so the idea that there could be some big world , some more magical way of make thing — - I be always excited when new technology come out and I be always the first one to want to try it . the possibility feel endless and exciting right now , which be what excite I . we be in this sort of wild west period , to I , it feel like , because nobody know what we be go to settle on . you can put story anywhere right now and that be cool to I , and it feel like once we figure out how to get the technology and the creativity of storytelle to meet , the possibility be endless .     cs : and also the technology have enable the thing I briefly fly by early , binge - view , which be a recent phenomenon , since you 've be do show , right ? and how do you think do that change the storytelling process at all ? you always have a bible for the whole season beforehand , right ?     sr : no , I just always know where we be go to end . so for I , the only way I can really comment on that be that I have a show that be be go on for 14 season and so there be the people who have be watch it for 14 season , and then there be the 12 - year - old girl I would encounter in the grocery store who have watch 297 episode in three week . seriously , and that be a very different experience for they , because they 've be inside of something really intensely for a very short period of time in a very intense way , and to they the story have a completely different arc and a completely different meaning because it never have any break .     cs : it be like visit a country and then leave it . it be a strange —     sr : it be like read an amazing novel and then put it down . I think that be the beauty of the experience . you do not necessarily have to watch something for 14 season . it be not necessarily the way everything be suppose to be .     cs : be there any topic that you do not think we should touch ?     sr : I do not think I think of story that way . I think of story in term of character and what character would do and what character need to do in order to make they move forward , so I be never really think of story in term of just plot , and when writer come into my writer 's room and pitch I plot , I say , " you be not speak english . " like , that be the thing I say . we be not speak english . I need to hear what be real . and so I do not think of it that way . I do not know if there be a way to think there be something I would not do because that feel like I be pluck piece of plot off a wall or something .     cs : that be great . to what extent do you think you will use — you know , you recently go on the board of planned parenthood and got involve in the hillary clinton campaign . to what extent do you think you will use your storytelling in the real world to effect change ?     sr : well , you know , there be — that be an intense subject to I , because I feel like the lack of narrative that a lot of people have be difficult . you know , like , there be a lot of organization that do not have a positive narrative that they 've create for themselves that would help they . there be a lot of campaign that could be help with a well narrative . the democrats could do a lot with a very strong narrative for themselves . there be a lot of different thing that could happen in term of use storytelling voice , and I do not mean that in a fiction way , I mean that in a same way that any speechwriter would mean it . and I see that , but I do not necessarily know that that be , like , my job to do that .     cs : all right .     please help I thank shonda . sr : thank you .     ( applause )  
   congratulation . by be here , listen , alive , a member of a grow specie , you be one of history 's great winner — the culmination of a success story four billion year in the making . you be life 's one percent . the loser , the 99 percent of specie who have ever live , be dead — kill by fire , flood , asteroid , predation , starvation , ice , heat and the cold math of natural selection . your ancestor , back to the early fish , overcome all these challenge . you be here because of golden opportunity make possible by mass extinction .     ( laughter )     it be true . the same be true of your co - winner and relative . the 34,000 kind of fish . how do we all get so lucky ? will we continue to win ? I be a fish paleobiologist who use big datum — the fossil record — to study how some specie win and other lose . the living can not tell we ; they know nothing but win . so , we must speak with the dead .     how do we make dead fish talk ? museum contain multitude of beautiful fish fossil , but their real beauty emerge when combine with the large number of ugly , broken fossil , and reduce to one and zero . I can trawl a 500 - million - year database for evolutionary pattern . for example , fish form can be capture by coordinate and transform to reveal major pathway of change and trend through time .     here be the story of the winner and loser of just one pivotal event I discover use fossil datum . let us travel back 360 million year — six time as long ago as the last dinosaur — to the devonian period ; a strange world . armored predator with razor - edge jaw dominate alongside huge fish with arm bone in their fin . crab - like fish scuttle across the sea floor . the few ray - fin relative of salmon and tuna cower at the bottom of the food chain . the few early shark live offshore in fear . your few four - legged ancestor , the tetrapod , struggle in tropical river plain . ecosystem be crowd . there be no escape , no opportunity in sight . then the world end .     ( laughter )     no , it be a good thing . 96 percent of all fish specie die during the hangenberg event , 359 million year ago : an interval of fire and ice . a crowded world be disrupt and sweep away .     now , you might think that be the end of the story . the mighty fall , the meek inherit the earth , and here we be . but win be not that simple . the handful of survivor come from many group — all greatly outnumber by their own dead . they range from top predator to bottom - feeder , big to small , marine to freshwater . the extinction be a filter . it merely level the playing field . what really count be what survivor do over the next several million year in that devastate world . the former overlord should have have an advantage . they become even large , store energy , invest in their young , spread across the globe , feast on fish , keep what have always work , and bide their time . yet they merely persist for a while , decline without innovate , become live fossil . they be too stuck in their way and be now largely forget .     a few of the long - suffer ray - fin , shark and four - legged tetrapod go the opposite direction . they become small — live fast , die young , eat little and reproduce rapidly . they try new food , different home , strange head and weird body .     ( laughter )     and they find opportunity , proliferate , and win the future for their 60,000 living specie , include you . that be why they look familiar . you know their name .     win be not about random event or an arm race . rather , survivor go down alternative , evolutionary pathway . some find incredible success , while other become dead fish walk .     ( laughter )     a real scientific term .     ( laughter )     I be now investigate how these pathway to victory and defeat repeat across time . my lab have already compile thousand upon thousand of dead fish , but many more remain . however , it be already clear that your ancestor ' survival through mass extinction , and their response in the aftermath make you who you be today .     what do this tell we for the future ? as long as a handful of specie survive , life will recover . the versatile and the lucky will not just replace what be lose , but win in new form . it just might take several million year .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   when I be four year old , my dad teach I the taos pueblo hoop dance , a traditional dance bear hundred of year ago in southwestern usa . a series of hoop be create out of willow wood , and they be thread together to create formation of the natural world , show the many beauty of life . in this dance , you be circle in a constant spin , mimic the movement of the sun and the passage of time . watch this dance be magic to I . like with a time capsule , I be take a look through a cultural window to the past . I feel a deep connection to how my ancestor use to look at the world around they .     since then , I 've always be obsess with time capsule . they take on many form , but the common thread be that they be uncontrollably fascinating to we as human being , because they be portal to a memory , and they hold the important power of keep story alive . as a filmmaker and composer , it be be my journey to find my voice , reclaim the story of my heritage and the past and infuse they into music and film time capsule to share .     to tell you a bit about how I find my voice , I would like to share a bit about how I grow up . in southern california , I grow up in a multigenerational home , mean I live under the same roof as my parent , aunt , uncle and grandparent . my mother be dutch - indonesian and chinese with immigrant parent , and my father be ojibwe and an enrol tribal member of the prairie band 's potawatomi tribe in northeastern kansas . so one weekend I would be learn how to fold dumpling , and the next , I would be traditional - style dancing at a powwow , immerse in the powerful sound of drum and singer . be surround by many culture be the norm , but also a very confusing experience . it be really hard for I to find my voice , because I never feel I be enough — never chinese , dutch - indonesian or native enough . because I never feel I be a part of any community , I seek to learn the story of my heritage and connect they together to rediscover my own .     the first medium I feel give I a voice be music . with layer of sound and multiple instrument , I could create soundscape and world that be much big than my own . through music , I be invite you into a sonic portal of my memory and emotion , and I be hold up a mirror to yours . one of my favorite instrument to play be the guzheng zither , a chinese harp - like instrument . while the hoop dance be hundred of year old , the guzheng have more than 2,000 year of history . I be play the style that greatly influence I today , like electronic music , with an instrument that be use to play traditional folk music long ago . and I notice an interesting connection : the zither be tune to the pentatonic scale , a scale that be universally know in so many part of music around the world , include native american folk song . in both chinese and native folk , I sense this inherent sound of longing and hold onto the past , an emotion that greatly drive the music I create today .     at the time , I wonder if I could make this feeling of immersion even more powerful , by layering visual and music — visual and image on top of the music . so I turn to internet tutorial to learn edit software , go to community college to save money and create film .     after a few year experiment , I be 17 and have something I want to tell and preserve . it start with a question : what happen when a story be forget ? I lead with this in my late documentary film , " smoke that travel , " which immerse people into the world of music , song , color and dance , as I explore my fear that a part of my identity , my native heritage , will be forget in time .     many indigenous language be die due to historically force assimilation . from the late 1800 to the early 1970 , native be force into boarding school , where they be violently punish if they practice traditional way or speak their native language , most of which be orally pass down . as of now , there be 567 federally recognize tribe in the united states , when there use to be countless more . in my father 's word , " be native be not about wear long hair in braid . it be not about feather or beadwork . it be about the way we all center ourselves in the world as human being . "     after travel with this film for over a year , I meet indigenous people from around the world , from the ainu of japan , sami of scandinavia , the maori and many more . and they be all deal with the exact same struggle to preserve their language and culture .     at this moment , I not only realize the power storytelling have to connect all of we as human being but the responsibility that come with this power . it can become incredibly dangerous when our story be rewrite or ignore , because when we be deny identity , we become invisible . we be all storyteller . reclaim our narrative and just listen to each other 's can create a portal that can transcend time itself .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   where do the end begin ? well , for I , it all begin with this little fellow . this adorable organism — well , I think it be adorable — be call tetrahymena and it be a single - celle creature . it be also be know as pond scum . so that be right , my career start with pond scum .     now , it be no surprise I become a scientist . grow up far away from here , as a little girl I be deadly curious about everything alive . I use to pick up lethally poisonous stinging jellyfish and sing to they . and so start my career , I be deadly curious about fundamental mystery of the most basic building block of life , and I be fortunate to live in a society where that curiosity be value .     now , for I , this little pond scum critter tetrahymena be a great way to study the fundamental mystery I be most curious about : those bundle of dna in our cell call chromosome . and it be because I be curious about the very end of chromosome , know as telomere . now , when I start my quest , all we know be that they help protect the end of chromosome . it be important when cell divide . it be really important , but I want to find out what telomere consist of , and for that , I need a lot of they . and it so happen that cute little tetrahymena have a lot of short linear chromosome , around 20,000 , so lot of telomere . and I discover that telomere consist of special segment of noncoding dna right at the very end of chromosome .     but here be a problem . now , we all start life as a single cell . it multiple to two . two become four . four become eight , and on and on to form the 200 million billion cell that make up our adult body . and some of those cell have to divide thousand of time . in fact , even as I stand here before you , all throughout my body , cell be furiously replenish to , well , keep I stand here before you . so every time a cell divide , all of its dna have to be copy , all of the code dna inside of those chromosome , because that carry the vital operating instruction that keep our cell in good working order , so my heart cell can keep a steady beat , which I assure you they be not do right now , and my immune cell can fight off bacteria and virus , and our brain cell can save the memory of our first kiss and keep on learn throughout life .     but there be a glitch in the way dna be copy . it be just one of those fact of life . every time the cell divide and the dna be copy , some of that dna from the end gets wear down and shorten , some of that telomere dna . and think about it like the protective cap at the end of your shoelace . and those keep the shoelace , or the chromosome , from fray , and when that tip get too short , it fall off , and that wear down telomere send a signal to the cell . " the dna be no long be protect . " it send a signal . time to die . so , end of story .     well , sorry , not so fast . it can not be the end of the story , because life have not die off the face of the earth . so I be curious : if such wear and tear be inevitable , how on earth do mother nature make sure we can keep our chromosome intact ?     now , remember that little pond scum critter tetrahymena ? the crazy thing be , tetrahymena cell never get old and die . their telomere be not shorten as time march on . sometimes they even get long . something else be at work , and believe I , that something be not in any textbook . so work in my lab with my extraordinary student carol greider — and carol and I share the nobel prize for this work — we begin run experiment and we discover cell do have something else . it be a previously undreame - of enzyme that could replenish , make long , telomere , and we name it telomerase . and when we remove our pond scum 's telomerase , their telomere run down and they die . so it be thank to their plentiful telomerase that our pond scum critter never get old .     ok , now , that be an incredibly hopeful message for we human to be receive from pond scum , because it turn out that as we human age , our telomere do shorten , and remarkably , that shortening be age we . generally speak , the long your telomere , the well off you be . it be the overshortening of telomere that lead we to feel and see sign of aging . my skin cell start to die and I start to see fine line , wrinkle . hair pigment cell die . you start to see gray . immune system cell die . you increase your risk of get sick . in fact , the cumulative research from the last 20 year have make clear that telomere attrition be contribute to our risk of get cardiovascular disease , alzheimer 's , some cancer and diabetes , the very condition many of we die of .     and so we have to think about this . what be go on ? this attrition , we look and we feel old , yeah . our telomere be lose the war of attrition fast . and those of we who feel youthful long , it turn out our telomere be stay long for long period of time , extend our feeling of youthfulness and reduce the risk of all we most dread as the birthday go by .     ok , seem like a no - brainer . now , if my telomere be connect to how quickly I be go to feel and get old , if my telomere can be renew by my telomerase , then all I have to do to reverse the sign and symptom of aging be figure out where to buy that costco - sized bottle of grade a organic fair trade telomerase , right ? great ! problem solve .     ( applause )     not so fast , I be sorry . alas , that be not the case . ok . and why ? it be because human genetic have teach we that when it come to our telomerase , we human live on a knife edge . ok , simply put , yes , nudge up telomerase do decrease the risk of some disease , but it also increase the risk of certain and rather nasty cancer . so even if you could buy that costco - sized bottle of telomerase , and there be many website market such dubious product , the problem be you could nudge up your risk of cancer . and we do not want that .     now , do not worry , and because , while I think it be kind of funny that right now , you know , many of we may be think , well , I would rather be like pond scum .     ( laughter )     there be something for we human in the story of telomere and their maintenance . but I want to get one thing clear . it be not about enormously extend human lifespan or immortality . it be about health span . now , health span be the number of year of your life when you be free of disease , you be healthy , you be productive , you be zestfully enjoy life . disease span , the opposite of health span , be the time of your life spend feel old and sick and die . so the real question become , ok , if I can not guzzle telomerase , do I have control over my telomere ' length and hence my well - being , my health , without those downside of cancer risk ? ok ?     so , it be the year 2000 . now , I 've be minutely scrutinize little teeny tiny telomere very happily for many year , when into my lab walk a psychologist name elissa epel . now , elissa 's expertise be in the effect of severe , chronic psychological stress on our mind 's and our body 's health . and there she be stand in my lab , which ironically overlook the entrance to a mortuary , and —     ( laughter )     and she have a life - and - death question for I . " what happen to telomere in people who be chronically stressed ? " she ask I . you see , she would be study caregiver , and specifically mother of child with a chronic condition , be it gut disorder , be it autism , you name it — a group obviously under enormous and prolonged psychological stress . I have to say , her question change I profoundly . see , all this time I have be think of telomere as those miniscule molecular structure that they be , and the gene that control telomere . and when elissa ask I about study caregiver , I suddenly see telomere in a whole new light . I see beyond the gene and the chromosome into the life of the real people we be study . and I be a mom myself , and at that moment , I be strike by the image of these woman deal with a child with a condition very difficult to deal with , often without help . and such woman , simply , often look wear down . so be it possible their telomere be wear down as well ?     so our collective curiosity go into overdrive . elissa select for our first study a group of such caregive mother , and we want to ask : what be the length of their telomere compare with the number of year that they have be caregive for their child with a chronic condition ? so four year go by and the day come when all the result be in , and elissa look down at our first scatterplot and literally gasp , because there be a pattern to the datum , and it be the exact gradient that we most fear might exist . it be right there on the page . the long , the more year that be , the mother have be in this caregive situation , no matter her age , the short be her telomere . and the more she perceive her situation as be more stressful , the low be her telomerase and the short be her telomere .     so we have discover something unheard of : the more chronic stress you be under , the short your telomere , mean the more likely you be to fall victim to an early disease span and perhaps untimely death . our finding mean that people 's life event and the way we respond to these event can change how you maintain your telomere . so telomere length be not just a matter of age count in year . elissa 's question to I , back when she first come to my lab , indeed have be a life - and - death question .     now , luckily , hide in that datum there be hope . we notice that some mother , despite having be carefully care for their child for many year , have be able to maintain their telomere . so study these woman closely reveal that they be resilient to stress . somehow they be able to experience their circumstance not as a threat day in and day out but as a challenge , and this have lead to a very important insight for all of we : we have control over the way we age all the way down into our cell .     ok , now our initial curiosity become infectious . thousand of scientist from different field add their expertise to telomere research , and the finding have pour in . it be up to over 10,000 scientific paper and counting . so several study rapidly confirm our initial finding that yes , chronic stress be bad for telomere . and now many be reveal that we have more control over this particular age process than any of we could ever have imagine . a few example : a study from the university of california , los angeles of people who be care for a relative with dementia , long - term , and look at their caregiver 's telomere maintenance capacity and find that it be improve by they practice a form of meditation for as little as 12 minute a day for two month . attitude matter . if you be habitually a negative thinker , you typically see a stressful situation with a threat stress response , mean if your boss want to see you , you automatically think , " I be about to be fire , " and your blood vessel constrict , and your level of the stress hormone cortisol creep up , and then it stay up , and over time , that persistently high level of the cortisol actually damp down your telomerase . not good for your telomere .     on the other hand , if you typically see something stressful as a challenge to be tackle , then blood flow to your heart and to your brain , and you experience a brief but energize spike of cortisol . and thank to that habitual " bring it on " attitude , your telomere do just fine . so ... what be all of this tell we ? your telomere do just fine . you really do have power to change what be happen to your own telomere .     but our curiosity just get more and more intense , because we start to wonder , what about factor outside our own skin ? could they impact our telomere maintenance as well ? you know , we human be intensely social being . be it even possible that our telomere be social as well ? and the result have be startling . as early as childhood , emotional neglect , exposure to violence , bullying and racism all impact your telomere , and the effect be long - term . can you imagine the impact on child of live year in a war zone ? people who can not trust their neighbor and who do not feel safe in their neighborhood consistently have short telomere . so your home address matter for telomere as well . on the flip side , tight - knit community , be in a marriage long - term , and lifelong friendship , even , all improve telomere maintenance .     so what be all this tell we ? it be tell we that I have the power to impact my own telomere , and I also have the power to impact your . telomere science have tell we just how interconnect we all be .     but I be still curious . I do wonder what you all of we will leave for the next generation ? will we invest in the next young woman or man peer through a microscope at the next little critter , the next bit of pond scum , curious about a question we do not even know today be a question ? it could be a great question that could impact all the world . and maybe , maybe you be curious about you . now that you know how to protect your telomere , be you curious what be you go to do with all those decade of brim good health ? and now that you know you could impact the telomere of other , be you curious how will you make a difference ? and now that you know the power of curiosity to change the world , how will you make sure that the world invest in curiosity for the sake of the generation that will come after we ?     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be six when I have the first chance to learn what patience mean . my grandmother give I a magic box as a birthday present , which neither of we know would become a gift for life . I become obsessed with magic , and at 20 , I become an amateur dove magician . this act of magic require that I train my dove to sit and wait inside my clothing . as a young magician , I be always in a rush to make they appear , but my teacher tell I the secret to the success of this magical act be to make my dove appear only after they 've wait patiently in my tuxedo . it have to be a mindful kind of patience , the kind that take I some year to master .     when life take I to shanghai seven year ago , the mindful patience I learn become almost impossible to practice . in china , where everyone and everything be in a hurry , you need to outperform over 1.3 billion other people to build a well life . you hack the system , bend the rule , circumvent the boundary . it be the same when it come to food ... except that when it come to food , impatience can have dire consequence . in the haste to grow more , sell more , 4,000 year of agriculture in a country of rich natural resource be spoil by the overuse of chemical and pesticide . in 2016 , the chinese government reveal half a million food safety violation in just nine month . alarmingly , one in every four diabetic in the world now come from china . the story around food be scary and somewhat overwhelming , and I tell myself it be time to bring a mindful patience into the impatience .     when I say mindful patience , I do not mean the ability to wait . I mean know how to act while wait . and so , while I wait for the day when a sustainable food system become a reality in china , I launch one of china 's first online farmer market to bring local , organically grow produce to family . when we go live , 18 month ago , the food we could sell then be somewhat dismal . we have no fruit and hardly any meat to sell , as none that be send to the lab pass our zero tolerance test towards pesticide , chemical , antibiotic and hormone . I tell our very anxious employee that we would not give up until we 've meet every local farmer in china .     today , we supply 240 type of produce from 57 local farmer . after almost one year of searching , we finally find chemical - free banana grow in the backyard of villager on hainan island . and only two hour away from shanghai , on an island that even google map do not have coordinate for , we find a place where cow eat grass and roam free under the blue sky . we also work hard on logistic . we deliver our customer ' order in as fast as three hour on electric vehicle , and we use biodegradable , reusable box to minimize our environmental footprint .     I have no doubt that our offering will continue to grow , but it will take time , and I know a lot more people be need to shape the future of good food . so last year , I found china 's first food tech accelerator and vc platform to help start - up to shape the future of good food the way they want , be that through use edible insect as a more sustainable source of protein or use essential oil to keep food fresh for long .     so , you may still ask : why be you try to build a sustainable food system by drive a patient movement in a country where it be almost a crime to take it slow ? because , for I , the real secret to success be patience — a mindful kind of patience that require know how to act while wait , the kind of patience I learn with my grandmother 's magic box . after all , we do not inherit the earth from our ancestor . we borrow it from our child .     thank you .     ( applause )  
   I be from detroit .     ( applause )     a city that in the 1950 be the world 's industrial giant , with a population of 1.8 million people and 140 square mile of land and infrastructure , use to support this booming , midwestern urban center .     and now today , just a half a century later , detroit be the poster child for urban decay . currently in detroit , our population be under 700,000 , of which 84 percent be african american , and due to decade of disinvestment and capital flight from the city into the suburb , there be a scarcity in detroit . there be a scarcity of retail , more specifically , fresh food retail , result in a city where 70 percent of detroiter be obese and overweight , and they struggle . they struggle to access nutritious food that they need , that they need to stay healthy , that they need to prevent premature illness and diet - relate disease . far too many detroiter live close to a fast food restaurant or to a convenience store , or to a gas station where they have to shop for food than they do a full - service supermarket . and this be not good news about the city of detroit , but this be the news and the story that detroiter intend to change . no , I be go to take that back . this be the story that detroiter be change , through urban agriculture and food entrepreneurship .     here be the thing : because of detroit 's recent history , it now find itself with some very unique asset , open land be one of they . expert say that the entire city of boston , san francisco , and the borough of manhattan will fit in the land area of the city of detroit . they far go on to say that 40 square mile of the city be vacant . that be a quarter to a third of the city , and with that level of emptiness , it create a landscape unlike any other big city . so detroit have this — open land , fertile soil , proximity to water , willing labor and a desperate demand for healthy , fresh food . all of this have create a people - power grassroots movement of people in detroit who be transform this city from what be the capital of american industry into an agrarian paradise .     ( applause )     you know , I think , out of all the city in the world , detroit , michigan , be well positioned to serve as the world 's urban exemplar of food security and sustainable development . in detroit , we have over 1,500 , yes , 1,500 garden and farm locate all across the city today . and these be not plot of land where we be just grow tomato and carrot either . you understand , urban agriculture in detroit be all about community , because we grow together . so these space be space of conviviality . these space be place where we be build social cohesion as well as provide healthy , fresh food to our friend , our family and our neighbor .     come walk with I . I want to take you through a few detroit neighborhood , and I want you to see what it look like when you empower local leadership , and when you support grassroots movement of folk who be move the needle in low - income community and people of color .     our first stop , oakland avenue farm . oakland avenue farm be locate in detroit 's north end neighborhood . oakland avenue farm be transform into a five - acre landscape combine art , architecture , sustainable ecology and new market practice . in the true sense of the word , this be what agriculture look like in the city of detroit . I 've have the opportunity to work with oakland avenue farm in host detroit - grow and make farm - to - table dinner . these be dinner where we bring folk onto the farm , we give they plenty of time and opportunity to meet and greet and talk to the grower , and then they be take on a farm tour . and then afterwards , they be treat to a farm - to - table meal prepare by a chef who showcase all the produce on the farm right at the peak of its freshness . we do that . we bring people onto the farm , we have folk sit around a table , because we want to change people 's relationship to food . we want they to know exactly where their food come from that be grow on that farm that be on the plate .     my second stop , I be go to take you on the west side of detroit , to the brightmoor neighborhood . now , brightmoor be a low - income community in detroit . there be about 13,000 resident in brightmoor . they decide to take a block - by - block - by - block strategy . so within the neighborhood of brightmoor , you 'll find a 21 - block microneighborhood call brightmoor farmway . now , what be a notorious , unsafe , underserved community have transform into a welcome , beautiful , safe farmway , lush with park and garden and farm and greenhouse . this tight - knit community also come together recently , and they purchase an abandon building , an abandon building that be in disrepair and in foreclosure . and with the help of friend and family and volunteer , they be able to take down the bulletproof glass , they be able to clean up the ground and they transform that build into a community kitchen , into a cafe , into a storefront . now the farmer and the food artisan who live in brightmoor , they have a place where they can make and sell their product . and the people in the community have some place where they can buy healthy , fresh food .     urban agriculture — and this be my third example — can be use as a way to lift up the business cooperative model . the 1,500 farm and garden I tell you about early ? keep grow detroit be a nonprofit organization that have a lot to do with those farm . they distribute last year 70,000 packet of seed and a quarter of a million transplant , and as a result of that last year , 550,000 pound of produce be grow in the city of detroit .     ( applause )     but aside from all of that , they also manage and operate a cooperative . it be call grow in detroit . it consist of about 70 farmer , small farmer . you all grow , and they sell together . they grow fruit , they grow vegetable , they grow flower , they grow herb in healthy soil , free of chemical , pesticide , fertilizer , genetically modify product — healthy food . and when their product be sell all over the city of detroit in local market , they get a hundred percent of the proceed from the sale .     in a city like detroit , where far too many , far too many african americans be die as a result of diet - relate disease , restaurant , they have a huge role to play in increase healthy food access in the city of detroit , culturally appropriate restaurant . enter detroit vegan soul . yes , we have a vegan soul food restaurant in the city of detroit .     ( applause )     yes , yes . detroit vegan soul be provide detroiter the opportunity to eat more plant - base meal and they 've receive an overwhelming response from detroiter . detroiter be hungry for culturally appropriate , fresh , delicious food . that be why we build a nonprofit organization call foodlab detroit , to help small neighborhood burgeon food entrepreneur start and scale healthy food business . foodlab provide these entrepreneur incubation , hand - on education , workshop , technical assistance , access to industry expert so that they can grow and scale . they be very small business , but last year , they have a combine revenue of over 7.5 million dollar , and they provide 252 job .     listen .     ( applause )     these be just a few example on how you expand opportunity so that everybody can participate and prosper , particularly those who come from neighborhood that have be historically exclude from these type of opportunity .     I know , I know . my city be a long way from succeed . we be still struggle , and I be not go to stand here on this stage and tell you that all of detroit 's problem and all of detroit 's challenge be go to be solve through urban agriculture . I be not go to do that , but I will tell you this : urban agriculture have detroit think about its city now in a different way , a city that can be both urban and rural . and yes , I know , these story be small , these story be neighborhood - base story , but these story be powerful . they be powerful because I be show you how we be create a new society leave vacant in the place and the space that be disintegration from the old . they be powerful story because they be story about love , the love that detroiter have for one another , the love that we have for our community , the love that we have for mother earth , but more importantly , these story be story on how devastation , despair , decay never ever get the last word in the city of detroit . when hundred of thousand of people leave detroit , and they leave we for dead , those who stay have hope . they hold on to hope . they never give up . they always keep fight . and listen , I know , transform a big city like detroit to one that be prosperous , one that be functional , one that be healthy , one that be inclusive , one that provide opportunity for all , I know it be tough , I know it be challenge , I know it be hard . but I just believe that if we start strengthen the social fabric of our community , and if we kickstart economic opportunity in our most vulnerable neighborhood , it all start with healthy , accessible , delicious , culturally appropriate food .     thank you very much .     ( applause )     thank you .  
   what image do we see from the rest of the world ? we see natural disaster , war , terror . we see refugee , and we see horrible disease . right ? we see beautiful beach , cute animal , beautiful nature , cultural rite and stuff . and then we be suppose to make the connection in our head and create a worldview out of this . and how be that possible ? I mean , the world seem so strange . and I do not think it be . I do not think the world be that strange , actually .     I 've get an idea . so , imagine the world as a street , where the poor live on one end and the rich on the other , and everyone in the world live on this street . you live there , I live there , and the neighbor we have be the one with the same income . people that live in the same block as I , they be from other country , other culture , other religion . the street might look something like this . and I be curious . in sweden where I live , I 've be meet quite a lot of student . and I want to know , where would they think they belong on a street like this ?     so we change these house into people . this be the seven billion people that live in the world . and just by live in sweden , most likely you belong there , which be the rich group . but the student , when you ask they , they think they be in the middle . and how can you understand the world when you see all these scary image from the world , and you think you live in the middle , while you be actually atop ? not very easy .     so I send out photographer to 264 home in 50 country — so far , still count — and in each home , the photographer take the same set of photo . they take the bed , the stove , the toy and about 135 other thing . so we have 40,000 image or something at the moment , and it look something like this .     here we see , it say on the top , " family in the world by income , " and we have the street represent just beneath it , you can see . and then we see some of the family we have visit . we have the poor to the left , the rich to the right , and everybody else in between , as the concept say . we can go down and see the different family we have be to so far . here , for instance , we have a family in zimbabwe , one in india , one in russia , and one in mexico , for instance . so we can go around and look at the family this way . but of course , we can choose if we want to see some certain country and compare they , or region , or if we want , to see other thing .     so let us go to the front door and see what they look like . go here , and this be the world by front door , order by income . and we can see the big difference from india , philippines , china , ukraine , in these example , for instance .     what if we go into the home ? we can look at bed . this be what bed can look like . do not look like the glossy magazine . do not look like the scary image in the medium . so remember that the student in sweden , they think they be in the middle of the world income . so let us go there . we zoom in here by filter the street to the middle , like this , and then I ask the student : be this what your bedroom look like ? and they would actually not feel very at home . so we go down and see , do they feel more at home here ? and they would say , no , this be not what a swedish typical bedroom look like . we go up here , and suddenly , they feel sort of at home . and we can see here in this image , we see bedroom in china , netherlands , south korea , france and the united states , for instance . so we can click here . if we want to know more about the family , the home in which this bed stand , we can just click it and go to the family , and we can see all the image from that family . we can go this way , too . and of course , this be free for anyone to use . so just go here , and please add more image , of course .     my personal favorite that everyone always try to make I not show , I be go to show you now , and that be toilet , because you be not really allow to look at people 's toilet , but now we can just do it , right ? so here ( laughter ) we have a lot of toilet . they look pretty much as we be use to , right ? and they be in china , netherlands , united states , nepal and so forth , ukraine , france . and they look pretty similar , right ? but remember , we be in the top . so what about check all the toilet ? now it look a bit different , do not it ?     so this way we can visually browse through category of imagery , use photo as datum . but not everything work as a photo . sometimes it be easy to understand what people do , so we also do video snippet of everyday activity , such as washing hand , do laundry , brushing tooth , and so on . and I be go to show you a short snippet of tooth - brushing , and we ’re go to start at the top .     so we see people brush their tooth . pretty interesting to see the same type of plastic toothbrush be be use in all these place in the same way , right ? some be more serious than other —     ( laughter )     but still , the toothbrush be there . and then , come down to this poor end , then we will see people start use stick , and they will sometimes use their finger to brush their tooth . so this particular woman in malawi , when she brush her tooth , she scrape some mud off from her wall and she mix it with water , and then she be brush . therefore , in the dollar street material , we have tag this image not only as her wall , which it be , but also as her toothpaste , because that be also what she use it for . so we can say , in the poor end of the street , you will use a stick or your finger , you come to the middle , you will start use a toothbrush , and then you come up to the top , and you will start use one each . pretty nice , not share a toothbrush with your grandma .     and you can also look at some country . here , we have the income distribution within the us , most people in the middle . we have a family we visit in the rich end , the howard . we can see their home here . and we also visit a family in the poor end , down here . and then what we can do now be we can do instant comparison of thing in their home . let us look in their cutlery drawer . so , observe the hadley : they have all their cutlery in a green plastic box . and they have a few different type and some of they be plastic , while the howard , they have this wooden drawer with small wooden compartment in it and a section for each type of cutlery . we can add more family , and we can see kitchen sink , or maybe live room .     of course , we can do the same in other country . so we go to china , we pick three family . we look at their house , we can look at their sofas , we can look at their stove . and when you see these stove , I think it be obvious that it be a stupid thing that usually , when we think about other country , we think they have a certain way of do thing . but look at these stove . very different , right , because it depend on what income level you have , how you be go to cook your food . but the cool thing be when we start compare across country . so here we have china and the us . see the big overlap between these two . so we pick the two home we have already see in these country , the wus and the howard . stand in their bedroom , pretty hard to tell which one be china and which one be the we , right ? both have brown leather sofas , and they have similar play structure . most likely both be make in china , so , I mean , that be not very strange —     ( laughter )     but that be similar .     we can of course go down to the other end of the street , add nigeria . so let us compare two home in china and nigeria . look at the family photo , they do not look like they have a lot in common , do they ? but start see their ceiling . they have a plastic shield and grass . they have the same kind of sofa , they store their grain in similar way , they be go to have fish for dinner , and they be boil their water in identical way . so if we would visit any of these home , there be a huge risk that we would say we know anything about the specific way you do thing in china or nigeria , while , look at this , it be quite obvious — this be how you do thing on this income level . that be what you can see when you go through the imagery in dollar street .     so go back to the figure , the seven billion people of the world , now we be go to do a quick recap . we be go to look at comparison of thing in the poor group : bed , roof , cooking . and observe , in all these comparison , their home be choose so they be in completely different place of the world . but what we see be pretty identical . so the poor billion cooking would look somewhat the same in these two place ; you might not have shoe ; eat , if you do not have a spoon ; store salt would be similar whether you be in asia or in africa ; and go to the toilet would be pretty much the same experience whether you be in nigeria or nepal .     in the middle , we have a huge group of five billion , but here we can see you will have electric light , most likely ; you will no long sleep on the floor ; you will store your salt in a container ; you will have more than one spoon ; you will have more than one pen ; the ceiling be no long leak that much ; you will have shoe ; you might have a phone , toy , and produce waste .     come to our group up here , similar shoe , jordan , we . we have sofa , fruit , hairbrush , bookshelf , toilet paper in tanzania , palestine , hard to distinguish if we would sit in we , palestine or tanzania from this one . vietnam , kenya : wardrobe , lamp , black dog , floor , soap , laundry , clock , computer , phone , and so on , right ?     so we have a lot of similarity all over the world , and the image we see in the medium , they show we the world be a very , very strange place . but when we look at the dollar street image , they do not look like that . so use dollar street , we can use photo as datum , and country stereotype — they simply fall apart . so the person stare back at we from the other side of the world actually look quite a lot like you . and that imply both a call to action and a reason for hope .     thank you .     ( applause )  
