Imagine being unable to say   I am hungry    I am in pain    thank you   or  I love you.  Being trapped inside your body  a body that doesn't respond to commands. Surrounded by people  yet utterly alone. Wishing you could reach out  to connect  to comfort  to participate. For    long years  that was my reality. Most of us never think twice about talking  about communicating. I've thought a lot about it. I've had a lot of time to think. For the first    years of my life  I was a normal  happy  healthy little boy. Then everything changed. I contracted a brain infection. The doctors weren't sure what it was  but they treated me the best they could. However  I progressively got worse. Eventually  I lost my ability to control my movements  make eye contact  and finally  my ability to speak. While in hospital  I desperately wanted to go home. I said to my mother   When home   Those were the last words I ever spoke with my own voice. I would eventually fail every test for mental awareness. My parents were told I was as good as not there. A vegetable  having the intelligence of a three month old baby. They were told to take me home and try to keep me comfortable until I died. My parents  in fact my entire family's lives  became consumed by taking care of me the best they knew how. Their friends drifted away. One year turned to two  two turned to three. It seemed like the person I once was began to disappear. The Lego blocks and electronic circuits I'd loved as a boy were put away. I had been moved out of my bedroom into another more practical one. I had become a ghost  a faded memory of a boy people once knew and loved. Meanwhile  my mind began knitting itself back together. Gradually  my awareness started to return. But no one realized that I had come back to life. I was aware of everything  just like any normal person. I could see and understand everything  but I couldn't find a way to let anybody know. My personality was entombed within a seemingly silent body  a vibrant mind hidden in plain sight within a chrysalis. The stark reality hit me that I was going to spend the rest of my life locked inside myself  totally alone. I was trapped with only my thoughts for company. I would never be rescued. No one would ever show me tenderness. I would never talk to a friend. No one would ever love me. I had no dreams  no hope  nothing to look forward to. Well  nothing pleasant. I lived in fear  and  to put it bluntly  was waiting for death to finally release me  expecting to die all alone in a care home. I don't know if it's truly possible to express in words what it's like not to be able to communicate. Your personality appears to vanish into a heavy fog and all of your emotions and desires are constricted  stifled and muted within you. For me  the worst was the feeling of utter powerlessness. I simply existed. It's a very dark place to find yourself because in a sense  you have vanished. Other people controlled every aspect of my life. They decided what I ate and when. Whether I was laid on my side or strapped into my wheelchair. I often spent my days positioned in front of the TV watching Barney reruns. I think because Barney is so happy and jolly  and I absolutely wasn't  it made it so much worse. I was completely powerless to change anything in my life or people's perceptions of me. I was a silent  invisible observer of how people behaved when they thought no one was watching. Unfortunately  I wasn't only an observer. With no way to communicate  I became the perfect victim  a defenseless object  seemingly devoid of feelings that people used to play out their darkest desires. For more than    years  people who were charged with my care abused me physically  verbally and sexually. Despite what they thought  I did feel. The first time it happened  I was shocked and filled with disbelief. How could they do this to me  I was confused. What had I done to deserve this  Part of me wanted to cry and another part wanted to fight. Hurt  sadness and anger flooded through me. I felt worthless. There was no one to comfort me. But neither of my parents knew this was happening. I lived in terror  knowing it would happen again and again. I just never knew when. All I knew was that I would never be the same. I remember once listening to Whitney Houston singing   No matter what they take from me  they can't take away my dignity.  And I thought to myself   You want to bet   Perhaps my parents could have found out and could have helped. But the years of constant caretaking  having to wake up every two hours to turn me  combined with them essentially grieving the loss of their son  had taken a toll on my mother and father. Following yet another heated argument between my parents  in a moment of despair and desperation  my mother turned to me and told me that I should die. I was shocked  but as I thought about what she had said  I was filled with enormous compassion and love for my mother  yet I could do nothing about it. There were many moments when I gave up  sinking into a dark abyss. I remember one particularly low moment. My dad left me alone in the car while he quickly went to buy something from the store. A random stranger walked past  looked at me and he smiled. I may never know why  but that simple act  the fleeting moment of human connection  transformed how I was feeling  making me want to keep going. My existence was tortured by monotony  a reality that was often too much to bear. Alone with my thoughts  I constructed intricate fantasies about ants running across the floor. I taught myself to tell the time by noticing where the shadows were. As I learned how the shadows moved as the hours of the day passed  I understood how long it would be before I was picked up and taken home. Seeing my father walk through the door to collect me was the best moment of the day. My mind became a tool that I could use to either close down to retreat from my reality or enlarge into a gigantic space that I could fill with fantasies. I hoped that my reality would change and someone would see that I had come back to life. But I had been washed away like a sand castle built too close to the waves  and in my place was the person people expected me to be. To some I was Martin  a vacant shell  the vegetable  deserving of harsh words  dismissal and even abuse. To others  I was the tragically brain damaged boy who had grown to become a man. Someone they were kind to and cared for. Good or bad  I was a blank canvas onto which different versions of myself were projected. It took someone new to see me in a different way. An aromatherapist began coming to the care home about once a week. Whether through intuition or her attention to details that others failed to notice  she became convinced that I could understand what was being said. She urged my parents to have me tested by experts in augmentative and alternative communication. And within a year  I was beginning to use a computer program to communicate. It was exhilarating  but frustrating at times. I had so many words in my mind  that I couldn't wait to be able to share them. Sometimes  I would say things to myself simply because I could. In myself  I had a ready audience  and I believed that by expressing my thoughts and wishes  others would listen  too. But as I began to communicate more  I realized that it was in fact only just the beginning of creating a new voice for myself. I was thrust into a world I didn't quite know how to function in. I stopped going to the care home and managed to get my first job making photocopies. As simple as this may sound  it was amazing. My new world was really exciting but often quite overwhelming and frightening. I was like a man child  and as liberating as it often was  I struggled. I also learned that many of those who had known me for a long time found it impossible to abandon the idea of Martin they had in their heads. While those I had only just met struggled to look past the image of a silent man in a wheelchair. I realized that some people would only listen to me if what I said was in line with what they expected. Otherwise  it was disregarded and they did what they felt was best. I discovered that true communication is about more than merely physically conveying a message. It is about getting the message heard and respected. Still  things were going well. My body was slowly getting stronger. I had a job in computing that I loved  and had even got Kojak  the dog I had been dreaming about for years. However  I longed to share my life with someone. I remember staring out the window as my dad drove me home from work  thinking I have so much love inside of me and nobody to give it to. Just as I had resigned myself to being single for the rest of my life  I met Joan. Not only is she the best thing that has ever happened to me  but Joan helped me to challenge my own misconceptions about myself. Joan said it was through my words that she fell in love with me. However  after all I had been through  I still couldn't shake the belief that nobody could truly see beyond my disability and accept me for who I am. I also really struggled to comprehend that I was a man. The first time someone referred to me as a man  it stopped me in my tracks. I felt like looking around and asking   Who  me   That all changed with Joan. We have an amazing connection and I learned how important it is to communicate openly and honestly. I felt safe  and it gave me the confidence to truly say what I thought. I started to feel whole again  a man worthy of love. I began to reshape my destiny. I spoke up a little more at work. I asserted my need for independence to the people around me. Being given a means of communication changed everything. I used the power of words and will to challenge the preconceptions of those around me and those I had of myself. Communication is what makes us human  enabling us to connect on the deepest level with those around us    telling our own stories  expressing wants  needs and desires  or hearing those of others by really listening. All this is how the world knows who we are. So who are we without it  True communication increases understanding and creates a more caring and compassionate world. Once  I was perceived to be an inanimate object  a mindless phantom of a boy in a wheelchair. Today  I am so much more. A husband  a son  a friend  a brother  a business owner  a first class honors graduate  a keen amateur photographer. It is my ability to communicate that has given me all this. We are told that actions speak louder than words. But I wonder  do they  Our words  however we communicate them  are just as powerful. Whether we speak the words with our own voices  type them with our eyes  or communicate them non verbally to someone who speaks them for us  words are among our most powerful tools. I have come to you through a terrible darkness  pulled from it by caring souls and by language itself. The act of you listening to me today brings me farther into the light. We are shining here together. If there is one most difficult obstacle to my way of communicating  it is that sometimes I want to shout and other times simply to whisper a word of love or gratitude. It all sounds the same. But if you will  please imagine these next two words as warmly as you can  Thank you. Raise your hand if you've ever been asked the question  What do you want to be when you grow up   Now if you had to guess  how old would you say you were when you were first asked this question  You can just hold up fingers. Three. Five. Three. Five. Five. OK. Now  raise your hand if the question  What do you want to be when you grow up   has ever caused you any anxiety. Any anxiety at all. I'm someone who's never been able to answer the question  What do you want to be when you grow up   See  the problem wasn't that I didn't have any interests    it's that I had too many. In high school  I liked English and math and art and I built websites and I played guitar in a punk band called Frustrated Telephone Operator. Maybe you've heard of us. This continued after high school  and at a certain point  I began to notice this pattern in myself where I would become interested in an area and I would dive in  become all consumed  and I'd get to be pretty good at whatever it was  and then I would hit this point where I'd start to get bored. And usually I would try and persist anyway  because I had already devoted so much time and energy and sometimes money into this field. But eventually this sense of boredom  this feeling of  like  yeah  I got this  this isn't challenging anymore    it would get to be too much. And I would have to let it go. But then I would become interested in something else  something totally unrelated  and I would dive into that  and become all consumed  and I'd be like   Yes  I found my thing   and then I would hit this point again where I'd start to get bored. And eventually  I would let it go. But then I would discover something new and totally different  and I would dive into that. This pattern caused me a lot of anxiety  for two reasons. The first was that I wasn't sure how I was going to turn any of this into a career. I thought that I would eventually have to pick one thing  deny all of my other passions  and just resign myself to being bored. The other reason it caused me so much anxiety was a little bit more personal. I worried that there was something wrong with this  and something wrong with me for being unable to stick with anything. I worried that I was afraid of commitment  or that I was scattered  or that I was self sabotaging  afraid of my own success. If you can relate to my story and to these feelings  I'd like you to ask yourself a question that I wish I had asked myself back then. Ask yourself where you learned to assign the meaning of wrong or abnormal to doing many things. I'll tell you where you learned it  you learned it from the culture. We are first asked the question  What do you want to be when you grow up   when we're about five years old. And the truth is that no one really cares what you say when you're that age. It's considered an innocuous question  posed to little kids to elicit cute replies  like   I want to be an astronaut   or  I want to be a ballerina   or  I want to be a pirate.  Insert Halloween costume here. But this question gets asked of us again and again as we get older in various forms    for instance  high school students might get asked what major they're going to pick in college. And at some point   What do you want to be when you grow up   goes from being the cute exercise it once was to the thing that keeps us up at night. Why  See  while this question inspires kids to dream about what they could be  it does not inspire them to dream about all that they could be. In fact  it does just the opposite  because when someone asks you what you want to be  you can't reply with    different things  though well meaning adults will likely chuckle and be like   Oh  how cute  but you can't be a violin maker and a psychologist. You have to choose.  This is Dr. Bob Childs    and he's a luthier and psychotherapist. And this is Amy Ng  a magazine editor turned illustrator  entrepreneur  teacher and creative director. But most kids don't hear about people like this. All they hear is that they're going to have to choose. But it's more than that. The notion of the narrowly focused life is highly romanticized in our culture. It's this idea of destiny or the one true calling  the idea that we each have one great thing we are meant to do during our time on this earth  and you need to figure out what that thing is and devote your life to it. But what if you're someone who isn't wired this way  What if there are a lot of different subjects that you're curious about  and many different things you want to do  Well  there is no room for someone like you in this framework. And so you might feel alone. You might feel like you don't have a purpose. And you might feel like there's something wrong with you. There's nothing wrong with you. What you are is a multipotentialite. A multipotentialite is someone with many interests and creative pursuits. It's a mouthful to say. It might help if you break it up into three parts  multi  potential  and ite. You can also use one of the other terms that connote the same idea  such as polymath  the Renaissance person. Actually  during the Renaissance period  it was considered the ideal to be well versed in multiple disciplines. Barbara Sher refers to us as  scanners.  Use whichever term you like  or invent your own. I have to say I find it sort of fitting that as a community  we cannot agree on a single identity. It's easy to see your multipotentiality as a limitation or an affliction that you need to overcome. But what I've learned through speaking with people and writing about these ideas on my website  is that there are some tremendous strengths to being this way. Here are three multipotentialite super powers. One  idea synthesis. That is  combining two or more fields and creating something new at the intersection. Sha Hwang and Rachel Binx drew from their shared interests in cartography  data visualization  travel  mathematics and design  when they founded Meshu. Meshu is a company that creates custom geographically inspired jewelry. Sha and Rachel came up with this unique idea not despite  but because of their eclectic mix of skills and experiences. Innovation happens at the intersections. That's where the new ideas come from. And multipotentialites  with all of their backgrounds  are able to access a lot of these points of intersection. The second multipotentialite superpower is rapid learning. When multipotentialites become interested in something  we go hard. We observe everything we can get our hands on. We're also used to being beginners  because we've been beginners so many times in the past  and this means that we're less afraid of trying new things and stepping out of our comfort zones. What's more  many skills are transferable across disciplines  and we bring everything we've learned to every new area we pursue  so we're rarely starting from scratch. Nora Dunn is a full time traveler and freelance writer. As a child concert pianist  she honed an incredible ability to develop muscle memory. Now  she's the fastest typist she knows. Before becoming a writer  Nora was a financial planner. She had to learn the finer mechanics of sales when she was starting her practice  and this skill now helps her write compelling pitches to editors. It is rarely a waste of time to pursue something you're drawn to  even if you end up quitting. You might apply that knowledge in a different field entirely  in a way that you couldn't have anticipated. The third multipotentialite superpower is adaptability  that is  the ability to morph into whatever you need to be in a given situation. Abe Cajudo is sometimes a video director  sometimes a web designer  sometimes a Kickstarter consultant  sometimes a teacher  and sometimes  apparently  James Bond. He's valuable because he does good work. He's even more valuable because he can take on various roles  depending on his clients' needs. Fast Company magazine identified adaptability as the single most important skill to develop in order to thrive in the   st century. The economic world is changing so quickly and unpredictably that it is the individuals and organizations that can pivot in order to meet the needs of the market that are really going to thrive. Idea synthesis  rapid learning and adaptability  three skills that multipotentialites are very adept at  and three skills that they might lose if pressured to narrow their focus. As a society  we have a vested interest in encouraging multipotentialites to be themselves. We have a lot of complex  multidimensional problems in the world right now  and we need creative  out of the box thinkers to tackle them. Now  let's say that you are  in your heart  a specialist. You came out of the womb knowing you wanted to be a pediatric neurosurgeon. Don't worry    there's nothing wrong with you  either. In fact  some of the best teams are comprised of a specialist and multipotentialite paired together. The specialist can dive in deep and implement ideas  while the multipotentialite brings a breadth of knowledge to the project. It's a beautiful partnership. But we should all be designing lives and careers that are aligned with how we're wired. And sadly  multipotentialites are largely being encouraged simply to be more like their specialist peers. So with that said  if there is one thing you take away from this talk  I hope that it is this  embrace your inner wiring  whatever that may be. If you're a specialist at heart  then by all means  specialize. That is where you'll do your best work. But to the multipotentialites in the room  including those of you who may have just realized in the last    minutes that you are one    to you I say  embrace your many passions. Follow your curiosity down those rabbit holes. Explore your intersections. Embracing our inner wiring leads to a happier  more authentic life. And perhaps more importantly    multipotentialites  the world needs us. Thank you. Over our lifetimes  we've all contributed to climate change. Actions  choices and behaviors will have led to an increase in greenhouse gas emissions. And I think that that's quite a powerful thought. But it does have the potential to make us feel guilty when we think about decisions we might have made around where to travel to  how often and how  about the energy that we choose to use in our homes or in our workplaces  or quite simply the lifestyles that we lead and enjoy. But we can also turn that thought on its head  and think that if we've had such a profound but a negative impact on our climate already  then we have an opportunity to influence the amount of future climate change that we will need to adapt to. So we have a choice. We can either choose to start to take climate change seriously  and significantly cut and mitigate our greenhouse gas emissions  and then we will have to adapt to less of the climate change impacts in future. Alternatively  we can continue to really ignore the climate change problem. But if we do that  we are also choosing to adapt to very much more powerful climate impacts in future. And not only that. As people who live in countries with high per capita emissions  we're making that choice on behalf of others as well. But the choice that we don't have is a no climate change future. Over the last two decades  our government negotiators and policymakers have been coming together to discuss climate change  and they've been focused on avoiding a two degree centigrade warming above pre industrial levels. That's the temperature that's associated with dangerous impacts across a range of different indicators  to humans and to the environment. So two degrees centigrade constitutes dangerous climate change. But dangerous climate change can be subjective. So if we think about an extreme weather event that might happen in some part of the world  and if that happens in a part of the world where there is good infrastructure  where there are people that are well insured and so on  then that impact can be disruptive. It can cause upset  it could cause cost. It could even cause some deaths. But if that exact same weather event happens in a part of the world where there is poor infrastructure  or where people are not well insured  or they're not having good support networks  then that same climate change impact could be devastating. It could cause a significant loss of home  but it could also cause significant amounts of death. So this is a graph of the CO  emissions at the left hand side from fossil fuel and industry  and time from before the Industrial Revolution out towards the present day. And what's immediately striking about this is that emissions have been growing exponentially. If we focus in on a shorter period of time from       we have established in      the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  the Rio Earth Summit in       then rolling on a few years  in      we had the Copenhagen Accord  where it established avoiding a two degree temperature rise in keeping with the science and on the basis of equity. And then in       we had the Rio    event. And all the way through  during all of these meetings and many others as well  emissions have continued to rise. And if we focus on our historical emission trend in recent years  and we put that together with our understanding of the direction of travel in our global economy  then we are much more on track for a four degree centigrade global warming than we are for the two degree centigrade. Now  let's just pause for a moment and think about this four degree global average temperature. Most of our planet is actually made up of the sea. Now  because the sea has a greater thermal inertia than the land  the average temperatures over land are actually going to be higher than they are over the sea. The second thing is that we as human beings don't experience global average temperatures. We experience hot days  cold days  rainy days  especially if you live in Manchester like me. So now put yourself in a city center. Imagine somewhere in the world  Mumbai  Beijing  New York  London. It's the hottest day that you've ever experienced. There's sun beating down  there's concrete and glass all around you. Now imagine that same day    but it's six  eight  maybe    to    degrees warmer on that day during that heat wave. That's the kind of thing we're going to experience under a four degree global average temperature scenario. And the problem with these extremes  and not just the temperature extremes  but also the extremes in terms of storms and other climate impacts  is our infrastructure is just not set up to deal with these sorts of events. So our roads and our rail networks have been designed to last for a long time and withstand only certain amounts of impacts in different parts of the world. And this is going to be extremely challenged. Our power stations are expected to be cooled by water to a certain temperature to remain effective and resilient. And our buildings are designed to be comfortable within a particular temperature range. And this is all going to be significantly challenged under a four degree type scenario. Our infrastructure has not been designed to cope with this. So if we go back  also thinking about four degrees  it's not just the direct impacts  but also some indirect impacts. So if we take food security  for example. Maize and wheat yields in some parts of the world are expected to be up to    percent lower under a four degree scenario  rice up to    percent lower. This will be absolutely devastating for global food security. So all in all  the kinds of impacts anticipated under this four degree centigrade scenario are going to be incompatible with global organized living. So back to our trajectories and our graphs of four degrees and two degrees. Is it reasonable still to focus on the two degree path  There are quite a lot of my colleagues and other scientists who would say that it's now too late to avoid a two degree warming. But I would just like to draw on my own research on energy systems  on food systems  aviation and also shipping  just to say that I think there is still a small fighting chance of avoiding this two degree dangerous climate change. But we really need to get to grips with the numbers to work out how to do it. So if you focus in on this trajectory and these graphs  the yellow circle there highlights that the departure from the red four degree pathway to the two degree green pathway is immediate. And that's because of cumulative emissions  or the carbon budget. So in other words  because of the lights and the projectors that are on in this room right now  the CO  that is going into our atmosphere as a result of that electricity consumption lasts a very long time. Some of it will be in our atmosphere for a century  maybe much longer. It will accumulate  and greenhouse gases tend to be cumulative. And that tells us something about these trajectories. First of all  it tells us that it's the area under these curves that matter  not where we reach at a particular date in future. And that's important  because it doesn't matter if we come up with some amazing whiz bang technology to sort out our energy problem on the last day of       just in the nick of time to sort things out. Because in the meantime  emissions will have accumulated. So if we continue on this red  four degree centigrade scenario pathway  the longer we continue on it  that will need to be made up for in later years to keep the same carbon budget  to keep the same area under the curve  which means that that trajectory  the red one there  becomes steeper. So in other words  if we don't reduce emissions in the short to medium term  then we'll have to make more significant year on year emission reductions. We also know that we have to decarbonize our energy system. But if we don't start to cut emissions in the short to medium term  then we will have to do that even sooner. So this poses really big challenges for us. The other thing it does is tells us something about energy policy. If you live in a part of the world where per capita emissions are already high  it points us towards reducing energy demand. And that's because with all the will in the world  the large scale engineering infrastructure that we need to roll out rapidly to decarbonize the supply side of our energy system is just simply not going to happen in time. So it doesn't matter whether we choose nuclear power or carbon capture and storage  upscale our biofuel production  or go for a much bigger roll out of wind turbines and wave turbines. All of that will take time. So because it's the area under the curve that matters  we need to focus on energy efficiency  but also on energy conservation    in other words  using less energy. And if we do that  that also means that as we continue to roll out the supply side technology  we will have less of a job to do if we've actually managed to reduce our energy consumption  because we will then need less infrastructure on the supply side. Another issue that we really need to grapple with is the issue of well being and equity. There are many parts of the world where the standard of living needs to rise. Bbut with energy systems currently reliant on fossil fuel  as those economies grow so will emissions. And now  if we're all constrained by the same amount of carbon budget  that means that if some parts of the world's emissions are needing to rise  then other parts of the world's emissions need to reduce. So that poses very significant challenges for wealthy nations. Because according to our research  if you're in a country where per capita emissions are really high    so North America  Europe  Australia    emissions reductions of the order of    percent per year  and starting immediately  will be required for a good chance of avoiding the two degree target. Let me just put that into context. The economist Nicholas Stern said that emission reductions of more than one percent per year had only ever been associated with economic recession or upheaval. So this poses huge challenges for the issue of economic growth  because if we have our high carbon infrastructure in place  it means that if our economies grow  then so do our emissions. So I'd just like to take a quote from a paper by myself and Kevin Anderson back in      where we said that to avoid the two degree framing of dangerous climate change  economic growth needs to be exchanged at least temporarily for a period of planned austerity in wealthy nations. This is a really difficult message to take  because what it suggests is that we really need to do things differently. This is not about just incremental change. This is about doing things differently  about whole system change  and sometimes it's about doing less things. And this applies to all of us  whatever sphere of influence we have. So it could be from writing to our local politician to talking to our boss at work or being the boss at work  or talking with our friends and family  or  quite simply  changing our lifestyles. Because we really need to make significant change. At the moment  we're choosing a four degree scenario. If we really want to avoid the two degree scenario  there really is no time like the present to act. Thank you. Bruno Giussani  Alice  basically what you're saying  the talk is  unless wealthy nations start cutting    percent per year the emissions now  this year  not in      or '    we are going to go straight to the four plus degree scenario. I am wondering what's your take on the cut by    percent for     . Alice Bows Larkin  Yeah  it's just nowhere near enough to avoid two degrees. One of the things that often    when there are these modeling studies that look at what we need to do  is they tend to hugely overestimate how quickly other countries in the world can start to reduce emissions. So they make kind of heroic assumptions about that. The more we do that  because it's the cumulative emissions  the short term stuff that really matters. So it does make a huge difference. If a big country like China  for example  continues to grow even for just a few extra years  that will make a big difference to when we need to decarbonize. So I don't think we can even say when it will be  because it all depends on what we have to do in the short term. But I think we've just got huge scope  and we don't pull those levers that allow us to reduce the energy demand  which is a shame. BG  Alice  thank you for coming to TED and sharing this data. ABL  Thank you. I want to talk to you about the future of medicine. But before I do that  I want to talk a little bit about the past. Now  throughout much of the recent history of medicine  we've thought about illness and treatment in terms of a profoundly simple model. In fact  the model is so simple that you could summarize it in six words  have disease  take pill  kill something. Now  the reason for the dominance of this model is of course the antibiotic revolution. Many of you might not know this  but we happen to be celebrating the hundredth year of the introduction of antibiotics into the United States. But what you do know is that that introduction was nothing short of transformative. Here you had a chemical  either from the natural world or artificially synthesized in the laboratory  and it would course through your body  it would find its target  lock into its target    a microbe or some part of a microbe    and then turn off a lock and a key with exquisite deftness  exquisite specificity. And you would end up taking a previously fatal  lethal disease    a pneumonia  syphilis  tuberculosis    and transforming that into a curable  or treatable illness. You have a pneumonia  you take penicillin  you kill the microbe and you cure the disease. So seductive was this idea  so potent the metaphor of lock and key and killing something  that it really swept through biology. It was a transformation like no other. And we've really spent the last     years trying to replicate that model over and over again in noninfectious diseases  in chronic diseases like diabetes and hypertension and heart disease. And it's worked  but it's only worked partly. Let me show you. You know  if you take the entire universe of all chemical reactions in the human body  every chemical reaction that your body is capable of  most people think that that number is on the order of a million. Let's call it a million. And now you ask the question  what number or fraction of reactions can actually be targeted by the entire pharmacopoeia  all of medicinal chemistry  That number is    . The rest is chemical darkness. In other words   .    percent of all chemical reactions in your body are actually targetable by this lock and key mechanism. You know  if you think about human physiology as a vast global telephone network with interacting nodes and interacting pieces  then all of our medicinal chemistry is operating on one tiny corner at the edge  the outer edge  of that network. It's like all of our pharmaceutical chemistry is a pole operator in Wichita  Kansas who is tinkering with about    or    telephone lines. So what do we do about this idea  What if we reorganized this approach  In fact  it turns out that the natural world gives us a sense of how one might think about illness in a radically different way  rather than disease  medicine  target. In fact  the natural world is organized hierarchically upwards  not downwards  but upwards  and we begin with a self regulating  semi autonomous unit called a cell. These self regulating  semi autonomous units give rise to self regulating  semi autonomous units called organs  and these organs coalesce to form things called humans  and these organisms ultimately live in environments  which are partly self regulating and partly semi autonomous. What's nice about this scheme  this hierarchical scheme building upwards rather than downwards  is that it allows us to think about illness as well in a somewhat different way. Take a disease like cancer. Since the     s  we've tried rather desperately to apply this lock and key model to cancer. We've tried to kill cells using a variety of chemotherapies  or targeted therapies  and as most of us know  that's worked. It's worked for diseases like leukemia. It's worked for some forms of breast cancer  but eventually you run to the ceiling of that approach. And it's only in the last    years or so that we've begun to think about using the immune system  remembering that in fact the cancer cell doesn't grow in a vacuum. It actually grows in a human organism. And could you use the organismal capacity  the fact that human beings have an immune system  to attack cancer  In fact  it's led to the some of the most spectacular new medicines in cancer. And finally there's the level of the environment  isn't there  You know  we don't think of cancer as altering the environment. But let me give you an example of a profoundly carcinogenic environment. It's called a prison. You take loneliness  you take depression  you take confinement  and you add to that  rolled up in a little white sheet of paper  one of the most potent neurostimulants that we know  called nicotine  and you add to that one of the most potent addictive substances that you know  and you have a pro carcinogenic environment. But you can have anti carcinogenic environments too. There are attempts to create milieus  change the hormonal milieu for breast cancer  for instance. We're trying to change the metabolic milieu for other forms of cancer. Or take another disease  like depression. Again  working upwards  since the     s and     s  we've tried  again  desperately to turn off molecules that operate between nerve cells    serotonin  dopamine    and tried to cure depression that way  and that's worked  but then that reached the limit. And we now know that what you really probably need to do is to change the physiology of the organ  the brain  rewire it  remodel it  and that  of course  we know study upon study has shown that talk therapy does exactly that  and study upon study has shown that talk therapy combined with medicines  pills  really is much more effective than either one alone. Can we imagine a more immersive environment that will change depression  Can you lock out the signals that elicit depression  Again  moving upwards along this hierarchical chain of organization. What's really at stake perhaps here is not the medicine itself but a metaphor. Rather than killing something  in the case of the great chronic degenerative diseases    kidney failure  diabetes  hypertension  osteoarthritis    maybe what we really need to do is change the metaphor to growing something. And that's the key  perhaps  to reframing our thinking about medicine. Now  this idea of changing  of creating a perceptual shift  as it were  came home to me to roost in a very personal manner about    years ago. About    years ago    I've been a runner most of my life    I went for a run  a Saturday morning run  I came back and woke up and I basically couldn't move. My right knee was swollen up  and you could hear that ominous crunch of bone against bone. And one of the perks of being a physician is that you get to order your own MRIs. And I had an MRI the next week  and it looked like that. Essentially  the meniscus of cartilage that is between bone had been completely torn and the bone itself had been shattered. Now  if you're looking at me and feeling sorry  let me tell you a few facts. If I was to take an MRI of every person in this audience     percent of you would show signs of bone degeneration and cartilage degeneration like this.    percent of all women by the age of    would show moderate to severe cartilage degeneration.    to    percent of the men in this audience would also have such signs. So this is a very common disease. Well  the second perk of being a physician is that you can get to experiment on your own ailments. So about    years ago we began  we brought this process into the laboratory  and we began to do simple experiments  mechanically trying to fix this degeneration. We tried to inject chemicals into the knee spaces of animals to try to reverse cartilage degeneration  and to put a short summary on a very long and painful process  essentially it came to naught. Nothing happened. And then about seven years ago  we had a research student from Australia. The nice thing about Australians is that they're habitually used to looking at the world upside down. And so Dan suggested to me   You know  maybe it isn't a mechanical problem. Maybe it isn't a chemical problem. Maybe it's a stem cell problem.  In other words  he had two hypotheses. Number one  there is such a thing as a skeletal stem cell    a skeletal stem cell that builds up the entire vertebrate skeleton  bone  cartilage and the fibrous elements of skeleton  just like there's a stem cell in blood  just like there's a stem cell in the nervous system. And two  that maybe that  the degeneration or dysfunction of this stem cell is what's causing osteochondral arthritis  a very common ailment. So really the question was  were we looking for a pill when we should have really been looking for a cell. So we switched our models  and now we began to look for skeletal stem cells. And to cut again a long story short  about five years ago  we found these cells. They live inside the skeleton. Here's a schematic and then a real photograph of one of them. The white stuff is bone  and these red columns that you see and the yellow cells are cells that have arisen from one single skeletal stem cell    columns of cartilage  columns of bone coming out of a single cell. These cells are fascinating. They have four properties. Number one is that they live where they're expected to live. They live just underneath the surface of the bone  underneath cartilage. You know  in biology  it's location  location  location. And they move into the appropriate areas and form bone and cartilage. That's one. Here's an interesting property. You can take them out of the vertebrate skeleton  you can culture them in petri dishes in the laboratory  and they are dying to form cartilage. Remember how we couldn't form cartilage for love or money  These cells are dying to form cartilage. They form their own furls of cartilage around themselves. They're also  number three  the most efficient repairers of fractures that we've ever encountered. This is a little bone  a mouse bone that we fractured and then let it heal by itself. These stem cells have come in and repaired  in yellow  the bone  in white  the cartilage  almost completely. So much so that if you label them with a fluorescent dye you can see them like some kind of peculiar cellular glue coming into the area of a fracture  fixing it locally and then stopping their work. Now  the fourth one is the most ominous  and that is that their numbers decline precipitously  precipitously  tenfold  fiftyfold  as you age. And so what had happened  really  is that we found ourselves in a perceptual shift. We had gone hunting for pills but we ended up finding theories. And in some ways we had hooked ourselves back onto this idea  cells  organisms  environments  because we were now thinking about bone stem cells  we were thinking about arthritis in terms of a cellular disease. And then the next question was  are there organs  Can you build this as an organ outside the body  Can you implant cartilage into areas of trauma  And perhaps most interestingly  can you ascend right up and create environments  You know  we know that exercise remodels bone  but come on  none of us is going to exercise. So could you imagine ways of passively loading and unloading bone so that you can recreate or regenerate degenerating cartilage  And perhaps more interesting  and more importantly  the question is  can you apply this model more globally outside medicine  What's at stake  as I said before  is not killing something  but growing something. And it raises a series of  I think  some of the most interesting questions about how we think about medicine in the future. Could your medicine be a cell and not a pill  How would we grow these cells  What we would we do to stop the malignant growth of these cells  We heard about the problems of unleashing growth. Could we implant suicide genes into these cells to stop them from growing  Could your medicine be an organ that's created outside the body and then implanted into the body  Could that stop some of the degeneration  What if the organ needed to have memory  In cases of diseases of the nervous system some of those organs had memory. How could we implant those memories back in  Could we store these organs  Would each organ have to be developed for an individual human being and put back  And perhaps most puzzlingly  could your medicine be an environment  Could you patent an environment  You know  in every culture  shamans have been using environments as medicines. Could we imagine that for our future  I've talked a lot about models. I began this talk with models. So let me end with some thoughts about model building. That's what we do as scientists. You know  when an architect builds a model  he or she is trying to show you a world in miniature. But when a scientist is building a model  he or she is trying to show you the world in metaphor. He or she is trying to create a new way of seeing. The former is a scale shift. The latter is a perceptual shift. Now  antibiotics created such a perceptual shift in our way of thinking about medicine that it really colored  distorted  very successfully  the way we've thought about medicine for the last hundred years. But we need new models to think about medicine in the future. That's what's at stake. You know  there's a popular trope out there that the reason we haven't had the transformative impact on the treatment of illness is because we don't have powerful enough drugs  and that's partly true. But perhaps the real reason is that we don't have powerful enough ways of thinking about medicines. It's certainly true that it would be lovely to have new medicines. But perhaps what's really at stake are three more intangible M's  mechanisms  models  metaphors. Thank you. Chris Anderson  I really like this metaphor. How does it link in  There's a lot of talk in technologyland about the personalization of medicine  that we have all this data and that medical treatments of the future will be for you specifically  your genome  your current context. Does that apply to this model you've got here  Siddhartha Mukherjee  It's a very interesting question. We've thought about personalization of medicine very much in terms of genomics. That's because the gene is such a dominant metaphor  again  to use that same word  in medicine today  that we think the genome will drive the personalization of medicine. But of course the genome is just the bottom of a long chain of being  as it were. That chain of being  really the first organized unit of that  is the cell. So  if we are really going to deliver in medicine in this way  we have to think of personalizing cellular therapies  and then personalizing organ or organismal therapies  and ultimately personalizing immersion therapies for the environment. So I think at every stage  you know    there's that metaphor  there's turtles all the way. Well  in this  there's personalization all the way. CA  So when you say medicine could be a cell and not a pill  you're talking about potentially your own cells. SM  Absolutely. CA  So converted to stem cells  perhaps tested against all kinds of drugs or something  and prepared. SM  And there's no perhaps. This is what we're doing. This is what's happening  and in fact  we're slowly moving  not away from genomics  but incorporating genomics into what we call multi order  semi autonomous  self regulating systems  like cells  like organs  like environments. CA  Thank you so much. SM  Pleasure. Thanks. Two twin domes  two radically opposed design cultures. One is made of thousands of steel parts  the other of a single silk thread. One is synthetic  the other organic. One is imposed on the environment  the other creates it. One is designed for nature  the other is designed by her. Michelangelo said that when he looked at raw marble  he saw a figure struggling to be free. The chisel was Michelangelo's only tool. But living things are not chiseled. They grow. And in our smallest units of life  our cells  we carry all the information that's required for every other cell to function and to replicate. Tools also have consequences. At least since the Industrial Revolution  the world of design has been dominated by the rigors of manufacturing and mass production. Assembly lines have dictated a world made of parts  framing the imagination of designers and architects who have been trained to think about their objects as assemblies of discrete parts with distinct functions. But you don't find homogenous material assemblies in nature. Take human skin  for example. Our facial skins are thin with large pores. Our back skins are thicker  with small pores. One acts mainly as filter  the other mainly as barrier  and yet it's the same skin  no parts  no assemblies. It's a system that gradually varies its functionality by varying elasticity. So here this is a split screen to represent my split world view  the split personality of every designer and architect operating today between the chisel and the gene  between machine and organism  between assembly and growth  between Henry Ford and Charles Darwin. These two worldviews  my left brain and right brain  analysis and synthesis  will play out on the two screens behind me. My work  at its simplest level  is about uniting these two worldviews  moving away from assembly and closer into growth. You're probably asking yourselves  Why now  Why was this not possible    or even five years ago  We live in a very special time in history  a rare time  a time when the confluence of four fields is giving designers access to tools we've never had access to before. These fields are computational design  allowing us to design complex forms with simple code  additive manufacturing  letting us produce parts by adding material rather than carving it out  materials engineering  which lets us design the behavior of materials in high resolution  and synthetic biology  enabling us to design new biological functionality by editing DNA. And at the intersection of these four fields  my team and I create. Please meet the minds and hands of my students. We design objects and products and structures and tools across scales  from the large scale  like this robotic arm with an    foot diameter reach with a vehicular base that will one day soon print entire buildings  to nanoscale graphics made entirely of genetically engineered microorganisms that glow in the dark. Here we've reimagined the mashrabiya  an archetype of ancient Arabic architecture  and created a screen where every aperture is uniquely sized to shape the form of light and heat moving through it. In our next project  we explore the possibility of creating a cape and skirt    this was for a Paris fashion show with Iris van Herpen    like a second skin that are made of a single part  stiff at the contours  flexible around the waist. Together with my long term  D printing collaborator Stratasys  we  D printed this cape and skirt with no seams between the cells  and I'll show more objects like it. This helmet combines stiff and soft materials in    micron resolution. This is the resolution of a human hair. It's also the resolution of a CT scanner. That designers have access to such high resolution analytic and synthetic tools  enables to design products that fit not only the shape of our bodies  but also the physiological makeup of our tissues. Next  we designed an acoustic chair  a chair that would be at once structural  comfortable and would also absorb sound. Professor Carter  my collaborator  and I turned to nature for inspiration  and by designing this irregular surface pattern  it becomes sound absorbent. We printed its surface out of    different properties  varying in rigidity  opacity and color  corresponding to pressure points on the human body. Its surface  as in nature  varies its functionality not by adding another material or another assembly  but by continuously and delicately varying material property. But is nature ideal  Are there no parts in nature  I wasn't raised in a religious Jewish home  but when I was young  my grandmother used to tell me stories from the Hebrew Bible  and one of them stuck with me and came to define much of what I care about. As she recounts   On the third day of Creation  God commands the Earth to grow a fruit bearing fruit tree.  For this first fruit tree  there was to be no differentiation between trunk  branches  leaves and fruit. The whole tree was a fruit. Instead  the land grew trees that have bark and stems and flowers. The land created a world made of parts. I often ask myself   What would design be like if objects were made of a single part  Would we return to a better state of creation   So we looked for that biblical material  that fruit bearing fruit tree kind of material  and we found it. The second most abundant biopolymer on the planet is called chitin  and some     million tons of it are produced every year by organisms such as shrimps  crabs  scorpions and butterflies. We thought if we could tune its properties  we could generate structures that are multifunctional out of a single part. So that's what we did. We called Legal Seafood    we ordered a bunch of shrimp shells  we grinded them and we produced chitosan paste. By varying chemical concentrations  we were able to achieve a wide array of properties    from dark  stiff and opaque  to light  soft and transparent. In order to print the structures in large scale  we built a robotically controlled extrusion system with multiple nozzles. The robot would vary material properties on the fly and create these    foot long structures made of a single material      percent recyclable. When the parts are ready  they're left to dry and find a form naturally upon contact with air. So why are we still designing with plastics  The air bubbles that were a byproduct of the printing process were used to contain photosynthetic microorganisms that first appeared on our planet  .  billion year ago  as we learned yesterday. Together with our collaborators at Harvard and MIT  we embedded bacteria that were genetically engineered to rapidly capture carbon from the atmosphere and convert it into sugar. For the first time  we were able to generate structures that would seamlessly transition from beam to mesh  and if scaled even larger  to windows. A fruit bearing fruit tree. Working with an ancient material  one of the first lifeforms on the planet  plenty of water and a little bit of synthetic biology  we were able to transform a structure made of shrimp shells into an architecture that behaves like a tree. And here's the best part  for objects designed to biodegrade  put them in the sea  and they will nourish marine life  place them in soil  and they will help grow a tree. The setting for our next exploration using the same design principles was the solar system. We looked for the possibility of creating life sustaining clothing for interplanetary voyages. To do that  we needed to contain bacteria and be able to control their flow. So like the periodic table  we came up with our own table of the elements  new lifeforms that were computationally grown  additively manufactured and biologically augmented. I like to think of synthetic biology as liquid alchemy  only instead of transmuting precious metals  you're synthesizing new biological functionality inside very small channels. It's called microfluidics. We  D printed our own channels in order to control the flow of these liquid bacterial cultures. In our first piece of clothing  we combined two microorganisms. The first is cyanobacteria. It lives in our oceans and in freshwater ponds. And the second  E. coli  the bacterium that inhabits the human gut. One converts light into sugar  the other consumes that sugar and produces biofuels useful for the built environment. Now  these two microorganisms never interact in nature. In fact  they never met each other. They've been here  engineered for the first time  to have a relationship inside a piece of clothing. Think of it as evolution not by natural selection  but evolution by design. In order to contain these relationships  we've created a single channel that resembles the digestive tract  that will help flow these bacteria and alter their function along the way. We then started growing these channels on the human body  varying material properties according to the desired functionality. Where we wanted more photosynthesis  we would design more transparent channels. This wearable digestive system  when it's stretched end to end  spans    meters. This is half the length of a football field  and    times as long as our small intestines. And here it is for the first time unveiled at TED    our first photosynthetic wearable  liquid channels glowing with life inside a wearable clothing. Thank you. Mary Shelley said   We are unfashioned creatures  but only half made up.  What if design could provide that other half  What if we could create structures that would augment living matter  What if we could create personal microbiomes that would scan our skins  repair damaged tissue and sustain our bodies  Think of this as a form of edited biology. This entire collection  Wanderers  that was named after planets  was not to me really about fashion per se  but it provided an opportunity to speculate about the future of our race on our planet and beyond  to combine scientific insight with lots of mystery and to move away from the age of the machine to a new age of symbiosis between our bodies  the microorganisms that we inhabit  our products and even our buildings. I call this material ecology. To do this  we always need to return back to nature. By now  you know that a  D printer prints material in layers. You also know that nature doesn't. It grows. It adds with sophistication. This silkworm cocoon  for example  creates a highly sophisticated architecture  a home inside which to metamorphisize. No additive manufacturing today gets even close to this level of sophistication. It does so by combining not two materials  but two proteins in different concentrations. One acts as the structure  the other is the glue  or the matrix  holding those fibers together. And this happens across scales. The silkworm first attaches itself to the environment    it creates a tensile structure    and it then starts spinning a compressive cocoon. Tension and compression  the two forces of life  manifested in a single material. In order to better understand how this complex process works  we glued a tiny earth magnet to the head of a silkworm  to the spinneret. We placed it inside a box with magnetic sensors  and that allowed us to create this   dimensional point cloud and visualize the complex architecture of the silkworm cocoon. However  when we placed the silkworm on a flat patch  not inside a box  we realized it would spin a flat cocoon and it would still healthily metamorphisize. So we started designing different environments  different scaffolds  and we discovered that the shape  the composition  the structure of the cocoon  was directly informed by the environment. Silkworms are often boiled to death inside their cocoons  their silk unraveled and used in the textile industry. We realized that designing these templates allowed us to give shape to raw silk without boiling a single cocoon. They would healthily metamorphisize  and we would be able to create these things. So we scaled this process up to architectural scale. We had a robot spin the template out of silk  and we placed it on our site. We knew silkworms migrated toward darker and colder areas  so we used a sun path diagram to reveal the distribution of light and heat on our structure. We then created holes  or apertures  that would lock in the rays of light and heat  distributing those silkworms on the structure. We were ready to receive the caterpillars. We ordered       silkworms from an online silk farm. And after four weeks of feeding  they were ready to spin with us. We placed them carefully at the bottom rim of the scaffold  and as they spin they pupate  they mate  they lay eggs  and life begins all over again    just like us but much  much shorter. Bucky Fuller said that tension is the great integrity  and he was right. As they spin biological silk over robotically spun silk  they give this entire pavilion its integrity. And over two to three weeks        silkworms spin       kilometers. In a curious symmetry  this is also the length of the Silk Road. The moths  after they hatch  produce  .  million eggs. This could be used for     additional pavilions for the future. So here they are  the two worldviews. One spins silk out of a robotic arm  the other fills in the gaps. If the final frontier of design is to breathe life into the products and the buildings around us  to form a two material ecology  then designers must unite these two worldviews. Which brings us back  of course  to the beginning. Here's to a new age of design  a new age of creation  that takes us from a nature inspired design to a design inspired nature  and that demands of us for the first time that we mother nature. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. I was just thinking that I have been missing you way too long There's something inside this weary head that wants us to love just instead But I was just thinking  merely thinking I've got loads of pictures  I've got the one of you in that dancing dress But man I feel silly in that dim light Just after doing you by the sight of my Kodak delights  I am sinking  merely sinking I think about long distance rates instead of kissing you babe I'm a singer without a song If I wait for you longer my affection is stronger and I ... I was just thinking  merely thinking that this boat is sinking I'm tired of postcards  especially the ones with cute dogs and cupids I'm tired of calling you and missing you and dreaming I slept with you Don't get me wrong I still desperately love you inside this weary head I just want us to love just instead But I was just thinking and thinking  merely thinking I think about long distance rates instead of kissing you babe and time is running me still If I wait for you longer my affection is stronger I ... I was just thinking I ... I was just thinking that I'm tired of calling you once a week thinking of long distance rates instead of kissing you So baby I'm sinking  merely sinking Thank you. Singing is sharing. When you sing  you have to know what you're talking about intimately  and you have to be willing to share this insight and give away a piece of yourself. I look for this intention to share in everything  and I ask  what are the intentions behind this architecture or this product or this restaurant or this meal  And if your intentions are to impress people or to get the big applause at the end  then you are taking  not giving. And this is a song that's about    it's the kind of song that everyone has their version of. This song is called  Home   and it's sort of a  This is where I'm from  nice to meet you all   kind of song. Home is the sound of birds early in the morning Home is a song I've always remembered Home is the memory of my first day in school Home is the books that I carry around Home is an alley in a faraway town Home is the places I ve been and where I d like to go Home I'm always gonna feel at home No matter where I may roam I'm always gonna find my way back home No matter how far I m gone I m always gonna feel this longing No matter where I might stay Home is a feather twirling in the air Home is flowers in a windowsill Home is all the things she said to me Home is a photo I never threw away Home is the smile on my face when I die Home is the taste of an apple pie I met a woman  she always lived in the same place And she said home is where you re born and raised And I met a man  he sat looking out to the sea And he said home is where you want to be I met a girl in some downtown bar And she said I'll have whatever he's having And I asked her how come we never met before  And she said all my life I ve been trying to get a place of my own I m always gonna feel at home No matter where I may roam Always gonna find my way back home No matter how far I m gone I'm always gonna feel this longing No matter where I might stay In my lab  we build autonomous aerial robots like the one you see flying here. Unlike the commercially available drones that you can buy today  this robot doesn't have any GPS on board. So without GPS  it's hard for robots like this to determine their position. This robot uses onboard sensors  cameras and laser scanners  to scan the environment. It detects features from the environment  and it determines where it is relative to those features  using a method of triangulation. And then it can assemble all these features into a map  like you see behind me. And this map then allows the robot to understand where the obstacles are and navigate in a collision free manner. What I want to show you next is a set of experiments we did inside our laboratory  where this robot was able to go for longer distances. So here you'll see  on the top right  what the robot sees with the camera. And on the main screen    and of course this is sped up by a factor of four    on the main screen you'll see the map that it's building. So this is a high resolution map of the corridor around our laboratory. And in a minute you'll see it enter our lab  which is recognizable by the clutter that you see. But the main point I want to convey to you is that these robots are capable of building high resolution maps at five centimeters resolution  allowing somebody who is outside the lab  or outside the building to deploy these without actually going inside  and trying to infer what happens inside the building. Now there's one problem with robots like this. The first problem is it's pretty big. Because it's big  it's heavy. And these robots consume about     watts per pound. And this makes for a very short mission life. The second problem is that these robots have onboard sensors that end up being very expensive    a laser scanner  a camera and the processors. That drives up the cost of this robot. So we asked ourselves a question  what consumer product can you buy in an electronics store that is inexpensive  that's lightweight  that has sensing onboard and computation  And we invented the flying phone. So this robot uses a Samsung Galaxy smartphone that you can buy off the shelf  and all you need is an app that you can download from our app store. And you can see this robot reading the letters   TED  in this case  looking at the corners of the  T  and the  E  and then triangulating off of that  flying autonomously. That joystick is just there to make sure if the robot goes crazy  Giuseppe can kill it. In addition to building these small robots  we also experiment with aggressive behaviors  like you see here. So this robot is now traveling at two to three meters per second  pitching and rolling aggressively as it changes direction. The main point is we can have smaller robots that can go faster and then travel in these very unstructured environments. And in this next video  just like you see this bird  an eagle  gracefully coordinating its wings  its eyes and feet to grab prey out of the water  our robot can go fishing  too. In this case  this is a Philly cheesesteak hoagie that it's grabbing out of thin air. So you can see this robot going at about three meters per second  which is faster than walking speed  coordinating its arms  its claws and its flight with split second timing to achieve this maneuver. In another experiment  I want to show you how the robot adapts its flight to control its suspended payload  whose length is actually larger than the width of the window. So in order to accomplish this  it actually has to pitch and adjust the altitude and swing the payload through. But of course we want to make these even smaller  and we're inspired in particular by honeybees. So if you look at honeybees  and this is a slowed down video  they're so small  the inertia is so lightweight    that they don't care    they bounce off my hand  for example. This is a little robot that mimics the honeybee behavior. And smaller is better  because along with the small size you get lower inertia. Along with lower inertia    along with lower inertia  you're resistant to collisions. And that makes you more robust. So just like these honeybees  we build small robots. And this particular one is only    grams in weight. It consumes only six watts of power. And it can travel up to six meters per second. So if I normalize that to its size  it's like a Boeing     traveling ten times the speed of sound. And I want to show you an example. This is probably the first planned mid air collision  at one twentieth normal speed. These are going at a relative speed of two meters per second  and this illustrates the basic principle. The two gram carbon fiber cage around it prevents the propellers from entangling  but essentially the collision is absorbed and the robot responds to the collisions. And so small also means safe. In my lab  as we developed these robots  we start off with these big robots and then now we're down to these small robots. And if you plot a histogram of the number of Band Aids we've ordered in the past  that sort of tailed off now. Because these robots are really safe. The small size has some disadvantages  and nature has found a number of ways to compensate for these disadvantages. The basic idea is they aggregate to form large groups  or swarms. So  similarly  in our lab  we try to create artificial robot swarms. And this is quite challenging because now you have to think about networks of robots. And within each robot  you have to think about the interplay of sensing  communication  computation    and this network then becomes quite difficult to control and manage. So from nature we take away three organizing principles that essentially allow us to develop our algorithms. The first idea is that robots need to be aware of their neighbors. They need to be able to sense and communicate with their neighbors. So this video illustrates the basic idea. You have four robots    one of the robots has actually been hijacked by a human operator  literally. But because the robots interact with each other  they sense their neighbors  they essentially follow. And here there's a single person able to lead this network of followers. So again  it's not because all the robots know where they're supposed to go. It's because they're just reacting to the positions of their neighbors. So the next experiment illustrates the second organizing principle. And this principle has to do with the principle of anonymity. Here the key idea is that the robots are agnostic to the identities of their neighbors. They're asked to form a circular shape  and no matter how many robots you introduce into the formation  or how many robots you pull out  each robot is simply reacting to its neighbor. It's aware of the fact that it needs to form the circular shape  but collaborating with its neighbors it forms the shape without central coordination. Now if you put these ideas together  the third idea is that we essentially give these robots mathematical descriptions of the shape they need to execute. And these shapes can be varying as a function of time  and you'll see these robots start from a circular formation  change into a rectangular formation  stretch into a straight line  back into an ellipse. And they do this with the same kind of split second coordination that you see in natural swarms  in nature. So why work with swarms  Let me tell you about two applications that we are very interested in. The first one has to do with agriculture  which is probably the biggest problem that we're facing worldwide. As you well know  one in every seven persons in this earth is malnourished. Most of the land that we can cultivate has already been cultivated. And the efficiency of most systems in the world is improving  but our production system efficiency is actually declining. And that's mostly because of water shortage  crop diseases  climate change and a couple of other things. So what can robots do  Well  we adopt an approach that's called Precision Farming in the community. And the basic idea is that we fly aerial robots through orchards  and then we build precision models of individual plants. So just like personalized medicine  while you might imagine wanting to treat every patient individually  what we'd like to do is build models of individual plants and then tell the farmer what kind of inputs every plant needs    the inputs in this case being water  fertilizer and pesticide. Here you'll see robots traveling through an apple orchard  and in a minute you'll see two of its companions doing the same thing on the left side. And what they're doing is essentially building a map of the orchard. Within the map is a map of every plant in this orchard. Let's see what those maps look like. In the next video  you'll see the cameras that are being used on this robot. On the top left is essentially a standard color camera. On the left center is an infrared camera. And on the bottom left is a thermal camera. And on the main panel  you're seeing a three dimensional reconstruction of every tree in the orchard as the sensors fly right past the trees. Armed with information like this  we can do several things. The first and possibly the most important thing we can do is very simple  count the number of fruits on every tree. By doing this  you tell the farmer how many fruits she has in every tree and allow her to estimate the yield in the orchard  optimizing the production chain downstream. The second thing we can do is take models of plants  construct three dimensional reconstructions  and from that estimate the canopy size  and then correlate the canopy size to the amount of leaf area on every plant. And this is called the leaf area index. So if you know this leaf area index  you essentially have a measure of how much photosynthesis is possible in every plant  which again tells you how healthy each plant is. By combining visual and infrared information  we can also compute indices such as NDVI. And in this particular case  you can essentially see there are some crops that are not doing as well as other crops. This is easily discernible from imagery  not just visual imagery but combining both visual imagery and infrared imagery. And then lastly  one thing we're interested in doing is detecting the early onset of chlorosis    and this is an orange tree    which is essentially seen by yellowing of leaves. But robots flying overhead can easily spot this autonomously and then report to the farmer that he or she has a problem in this section of the orchard. Systems like this can really help  and we're projecting yields that can improve by about ten percent and  more importantly  decrease the amount of inputs such as water by    percent by using aerial robot swarms. Lastly  I want you to applaud the people who actually create the future  Yash Mulgaonkar  Sikang Liu and Giuseppe Loianno  who are responsible for the three demonstrations that you saw. Thank you. We all go to doctors. And we do so with trust and blind faith that the test they are ordering and the medications they're prescribing are based upon evidence    evidence that's designed to help us. However  the reality is that that hasn't always been the case for everyone. What if I told you that the medical science discovered over the past century has been based on only half the population  I'm an emergency medicine doctor. I was trained to be prepared in a medical emergency. It's about saving lives. How cool is that  OK  there's a lot of runny noses and stubbed toes  but no matter who walks through the door to the ER  we order the same tests  we prescribe the same medication  without ever thinking about the sex or gender of our patients. Why would we  We were never taught that there were any differences between men and women. A recent Government Accountability study revealed that    percent of the drugs withdrawn from the market are due to side effects on women. So let's think about that for a minute. Why are we discovering side effects on women only after a drug has been released to the market  Do you know that it takes years for a drug to go from an idea to being tested on cells in a laboratory  to animal studies  to then clinical trials on humans  finally to go through a regulatory approval process  to be available for your doctor to prescribe to you  Not to mention the millions and billions of dollars of funding it takes to go through that process. So why are we discovering unacceptable side effects on half the population after that has gone through  What's happening  Well  it turns out that those cells used in that laboratory  they're male cells  and the animals used in the animal studies were male animals  and the clinical trials have been performed almost exclusively on men. How is it that the male model became our framework for medical research  Let's look at an example that has been popularized in the media  and it has to do with the sleep aid Ambien. Ambien was released on the market over    years ago  and since then  hundreds of millions of prescriptions have been written  primarily to women  because women suffer more sleep disorders than men. But just this past year  the Food and Drug Administration recommended cutting the dose in half for women only  because they just realized that women metabolize the drug at a slower rate than men  causing them to wake up in the morning with more of the active drug in their system. And then they're drowsy and they're getting behind the wheel of the car  and they're at risk for motor vehicle accidents. And I can't help but think  as an emergency physician  how many of my patients that I've cared for over the years were involved in a motor vehicle accident that possibly could have been prevented if this type of analysis was performed and acted upon    years ago when this drug was first released. How many other things need to be analyzed by gender  What else are we missing  World War II changed a lot of things  and one of them was this need to protect people from becoming victims of medical research without informed consent. So some much needed guidelines or rules were set into place  and part of that was this desire to protect women of childbearing age from entering into any medical research studies. There was fear  what if something happened to the fetus during the study  Who would be responsible  And so the scientists at this time actually thought this was a blessing in disguise  because let's face it    men's bodies are pretty homogeneous. They don't have the constantly fluctuating levels of hormones that could disrupt clean data they could get if they had only men. It was easier. It was cheaper. Not to mention  at this time  there was a general assumption that men and women were alike in every way  apart from their reproductive organs and sex hormones. So it was decided  medical research was performed on men  and the results were later applied to women. What did this do to the notion of women's health  Women's health became synonymous with reproduction  breasts  ovaries  uterus  pregnancy. It's this term we now refer to as  bikini medicine.  And this stayed this way until about the     s  when this concept was challenged by the medical community and by the public health policymakers when they realized that by excluding women from all medical research studies we actually did them a disservice  in that apart from reproductive issues  virtually nothing was known about the unique needs of the female patient. Since that time  an overwhelming amount of evidence has come to light that shows us just how different men and women are in every way. You know  we have this saying in medicine  children are not just little adults. And we say that to remind ourselves that children actually have a different physiology than normal adults. And it's because of this that the medical specialty of pediatrics came to light. And we now conduct research on children in order to improve their lives. And I know the same thing can be said about women. Women are not just men with boobs and tubes. But they have their own anatomy and physiology that deserves to be studied with the same intensity. Let's take the cardiovascular system  for example. This area in medicine has done the most to try to figure out why it seems men and women have completely different heart attacks. Heart disease is the number one killer for both men and women  but more women die within the first year of having a heart attack than men. Men will complain of crushing chest pain    an elephant is sitting on their chest. And we call this typical. Women have chest pain  too. But more women than men will complain of  just not feeling right    can't seem to get enough air in    just so tired lately.  And for some reason we call this atypical  even though  as I mentioned  women do make up half the population. And so what is some of the evidence to help explain some of these differences  If we look at the anatomy  the blood vessels that surround the heart are smaller in women compared to men  and the way that those blood vessels develop disease is different in women compared to men. And the test that we use to determine if someone is at risk for a heart attack  well  they were initially designed and tested and perfected in men  and so aren't as good at determining that in women. And then if we think about the medications    common medications that we use  like aspirin. We give aspirin to healthy men to help prevent them from having a heart attack  but do you know that if you give aspirin to a healthy woman  it's actually harmful  What this is doing is merely telling us that we are scratching the surface. Emergency medicine is a fast paced business. In how many life saving areas of medicine  like cancer and stroke  are there important differences between men and women that we could be utilizing  Or even  why is it that some people get those runny noses more than others  or why the pain medication that we give to those stubbed toes work in some and not in others  The Institute of Medicine has said every cell has a sex. What does this mean  Sex is DNA. Gender is how someone presents themselves in society. And these two may not always match up  as we can see with our transgendered population. But it's important to realize that from the moment of conception  every cell in our bodies    skin  hair  heart and lungs    contains our own unique DNA  and that DNA contains the chromosomes that determine whether we become male or female  man or woman. It used to be thought that those sex determining chromosomes pictured here    XY if you're male  XX if you're female    merely determined whether you would be born with ovaries or testes  and it was the sex hormones that those organs produced that were responsible for the differences we see in the opposite sex. But we now know that that theory was wrong    or it's at least a little incomplete. And thankfully  scientists like Dr. Page from the Whitehead Institute  who works on the Y chromosome  and Doctor Yang from UCLA  they have found evidence that tells us that those sex determining chromosomes that are in every cell in our bodies continue to remain active for our entire lives and could be what's responsible for the differences we see in the dosing of drugs  or why there are differences between men and women in the susceptibility and severity of diseases. This new knowledge is the game changer  and it's up to those scientists that continue to find that evidence  but it's up to the clinicians to start translating this data at the bedside  today. Right now. And to help do this  I'm a co founder of a national organization called Sex and Gender Women's Health Collaborative  and we collect all of this data so that it's available for teaching and for patient care. And we're working to bring together the medical educators to the table. That's a big job. It's changing the way medical training has been done since its inception. But I believe in them. I know they're going to see the value of incorporating the gender lens into the current curriculum. It's about training the future health care providers correctly. And regionally  I'm a co creator of a division within the Department of Emergency Medicine here at Brown University  called Sex and Gender in Emergency Medicine  and we conduct the research to determine the differences between men and women in emergent conditions  like heart disease and stroke and sepsis and substance abuse  but we also believe that education is paramount. We've created a     degree model of education. We have programs for the doctors  for the nurses  for the students and for the patients. Because this cannot just be left up to the health care leaders. We all have a role in making a difference. But I must warn you  this is not easy. In fact  it's hard. It's essentially changing the way we think about medicine and health and research. It's changing our relationship to the health care system. But there's no going back. We now know just enough to know that we weren't doing it right. Martin Luther King  Jr. has said   Change does not roll in on the wheels of inevitability  but comes through continuous struggle.  And the first step towards change is awareness. This is not just about improving medical care for women. This is about personalized  individualized health care for everyone. This awareness has the power to transform medical care for men and women. And from now on  I want you to ask your doctors whether the treatments you are receiving are specific to your sex and gender. They may not know the answer    yet. But the conversation has begun  and together we can all learn. Remember  for me and my colleagues in this field  your sex and gender matter. Thank you. So this right here is the tiny village of Elle  close to Lista. It's right at the southernmost tip of Norway. And on January   this year  an elderly guy who lives in the village  he went out to see what was cast ashore during a recent storm. And on a patch of grass right next to the water's edge  he found a wetsuit. It was grey and black  and he thought it looked cheap. Out of each leg of the wetsuit there were sticking two white bones. It was clearly the remains of a human being. And usually  in Norway  dead people are identified quickly. So the police started searching through missing reports from the local area  national missing reports  and looked for accidents with a possible connection. They found nothing. So they ran a DNA profile  and they started searching internationally through Interpol. Nothing. This was a person that nobody seemed to be missing. It was an invisible life heading for a nameless grave. But then  after a month  the police in Norway got a message from the police in the Netherlands. A couple of months earlier  they had found a body  in an identical wetsuit  and they had no idea who this person was. But the police in the Netherlands managed to trace the wetsuit by an RFID chip that was sewn in the suit. So they were then able to tell that both wetsuits were bought by the same customer at the same time  October          in the French city of Calais by the English Channel. But this was all they were able to figure out. The customer paid cash. There was no surveillance footage from the shop. So it became a cold case. We heard this story  and it triggered me and my colleague  photographer Tomm Christiansen  and we of course had the obvious question  who were these people  At the time  I'd barely heard about Calais  but it took about two or three seconds to figure out Calais is basically known for two things. It's the spot in continental Europe closest to Britain  and a lot of migrants and refugees are staying in this camp and are trying desperately to cross over to Britain. And right there was a plausible theory about the identity of the two people  and the police made this theory as well. Because if you or I or anybody else with a firm connection to Europe goes missing off the coast of France  people would just know. Your friends or family would report you missing  the police would come search for you  the media would know  and there would be pictures of you on lampposts. It's difficult to disappear without a trace. But if you just fled the war in Syria  and your family  if you have any family left  don't necessarily know where you are  and you're staying here illegally amongst thousands of others who come and go every day. Well  if you disappear one day  nobody will notice. The police won't come search for you because nobody knows you're gone. And this is what happened to Shadi Omar Kataf and Mouaz Al Balkhi from Syria. Me and Tomm went to Calais for the first time in April this year  and after three months of investigation  we were able to tell the story about how these two young men fled the war in Syria  ended up stuck in Calais  bought wetsuits and drowned in what seems to have been an attempt to swim across the English Channel in order to reach England. It is a story about the fact that everybody has a name  everybody has a story  everybody is someone. But it is also a story about what it's like to be a refugee in Europe today. So this is where we started our search. This is in Calais. Right now  between       and       people are living here under horrible conditions. It has been dubbed the worst refugee camp in Europe. Limited access to food  limited access to water  limited access to health care. Disease and infections are widespread. And they're all stuck here because they're trying to get to England in order to claim asylum. And they do that by hiding in the back of trucks headed for the ferry  or the Eurotunnel  or they sneak inside the tunnel terminal at night to try to hide on the trains. Most want to go to Britain because they know the language  and so they figure it would be easier to restart their lives from there. They want to work  they want to study  they want to be able to continue their lives. A lot of these people are highly educated and skilled workers. If you go to Calais and talk to refugees  you'll meet lawyers  politicians  engineers  graphic designers  farmers  soldiers. You've got the whole spectrum. But who all of these people are usually gets lost in the way we talk about refugees and migrants  because we usually do that in statistics. So you have    million refugees globally. About half a million have made the crossing over the Mediterranean into Europe so far this year  and roughly       are staying in Calais. But these are numbers  and the numbers don't say anything about who these people are  where they came from  or why they're here. And first  I want to tell you about one of them. This is    year old Mouaz Al Balkhi from Syria. We first heard about him after being in Calais the first time looking for answers to the theory of the two dead bodies. And after a while  we heard this story about a Syrian man who was living in Bradford in England  and had been desperately searching for his nephew Mouaz for months. And it turned out the last time anybody had heard anything from Mouaz was October        . That was the same date the wetsuits were bought. So we flew over there and we met the uncle and we did DNA samples of him  and later on got additional DNA samples from Mouaz's closest relative who now lives in Jordan. The analysis concluded the body who was found in a wetsuit on a beach in the Netherlands was actually Mouaz Al Balkhi. And while we were doing all this investigation  we got to know Mouaz's story. He was born in the Syrian capital of Damascus in     . He was raised in a middle class family  and his father in the middle there is a chemical engineer who spent    years in prison for belonging to the political opposition in Syria. While his father was in prison  Mouaz took responsibility and he cared for his three sisters. They said he was that kind of guy. Mouaz studied to become an electrical engineer at the University of Damascus. So a couple of years into the Syrian war  the family fled Damascus and went to the neighboring country  Jordan. Their father had problems finding work in Jordan  and Mouaz could not continue his studies  so he figured   OK  the best thing I can do to help my family would be to go somewhere where I can finish my studies and find work.  So he goes to Turkey. In Turkey  he's not accepted at a university  and once he had left Jordan as a refugee  he was not allowed to reenter. So then he decides to head for the UK  where his uncle lives. He makes it into Algeria  walks into Libya  pays a people smuggler to help him with the crossing into Italy by boat  and from there on he heads to Dunkirk  the city right next to Calais by the English Channel. We know he made at least    failed attempts to cross the English Channel by hiding in a truck. But at some point  he must have given up all hope. The last night we know he was alive  he spent at a cheap hotel close to the train station in Dunkirk. We found his name in the records  and he seems to have stayed there alone. The day after  he went into Calais  entered a sports shop a couple of minutes before   o'clock in the evening  along with Shadi Kataf. They both bought wetsuits  and the woman in the shop was the last person we know of to have seen them alive. We have tried to figure out where Shadi met Mouaz  but we weren't able to do that. But they do have a similar story. We first heard about Shadi after a cousin of his  living in Germany  had read an Arabic translation of the story made of Mouaz on Facebook. So we got in touch with him. Shadi  a couple of years older than Mouaz  was also raised in Damascus. He was a working kind of guy. He ran a tire repair shop and later worked in a printing company. He lived with his extended family  but their house got bombed early in the war. So the family fled to an area of Damascus known as Camp Yarmouk. Yarmouk is being described as the worst place to live on planet Earth. They've been bombed by the military  they've been besieged  they've been stormed by ISIS and they've been cut off from supplies for years. There was a UN official who visited last year  and he said   They ate all the grass so there was no grass left.  Out of a population of          only        are believed to still be left in Yarmouk. Shadi and his sisters got out. The parents are still stuck inside. So Shadi and one of his sisters  they fled to Libya. This was after the fall of Gaddafi  but before Libya turned into full blown civil war. And in this last remaining sort of stability in Libya  Shadi took up scuba diving  and he seemed to spend most of his time underwater. He fell completely in love with the ocean  so when he finally decided that he could no longer be in Libya  late August       he hoped to find work as a diver when he reached Italy. Reality was not that easy. We don't know much about his travels because he had a hard time communicating with his family  but we do know that he struggled. And by the end of September  he was living on the streets somewhere in France. On October    he calls his cousin in Belgium  and explains his situation. He said   I'm in Calais. I need you to come get my backpack and my laptop. I can't afford to pay the people smugglers to help me with the crossing to Britain  but I will go buy a wetsuit and I will swim.  His cousin  of course  tried to warn him not to  but Shadi's battery on the phone went flat  and his phone was never switched on again. What was left of Shadi was found nearly three months later      kilometers away in a wetsuit on a beach in Norway. He's still waiting for his funeral in Norway  and none of his family will be able to attend. Many may think that the story about Shadi and Mouaz is a story about death  but I don't agree. To me  this is a story about two questions that I think we all share  what is a better life  and what am I willing to do to achieve it  And to me  and probably a lot of you  a better life would mean being able to do more of what we think of as meaningful  whether that be spending more time with your family and friends  travel to an exotic place  or just getting money to buy that cool new device or a pair of new sneakers. And this is all within our reach pretty easily. But if you are fleeing a war zone  the answers to those two questions are dramatically different. A better life is a life in safety. It's a life in dignity. A better life means not having your house bombed  not fearing being kidnapped. It means being able to send your children to school  go to university  or just find work to be able to provide for yourself and the ones you love. A better life would be a future of some possibilities compared to nearly none  and that's a strong motivation. And I have no trouble imagining that after spending weeks or even months as a second grade citizen  living on the streets or in a horrible makeshift camp with a stupid  racist name like  The Jungle   most of us would be willing to do just about anything. If I could ask Shadi and Mouaz the second they stepped into the freezing waters of the English Channel  they would probably say   This is worth the risk   because they could no longer see any other option. And that's desperation  but that's the reality of living as a refugee in Western Europe in     . Thank you. Bruno Giussani  Thank you  Anders. This is Tomm Christiansen  who took most of the pictures you have seen and they've done reporting together. Tomm  you two have been back to Calais recently. This was the third trip. It was after the publication of the article. What has changed  What have you seen there  Tomm Christiansen  The first time we were in Calais  it was about       refugees there. They had a difficult time  but they were positive  they had hope. The last time  the camp has grown  maybe four or five thousand people. It seemed more permanent  NGOs have arrived  a small school has opened. But the thing is that the refugees have stayed for a longer time  and the French government has managed to seal off the borders better  so now The Jungle is growing  along with the despair and hopelessness among the refugees. BG  Are you planning to go back  And continue the reporting  TC  Yes. BG  Anders  I'm a former journalist  and to me  it's amazing that in the current climate of slashing budgets and publishers in crisis  Dagbladet has consented so many resources for this story  which tells a lot about newspapers taking the responsibility  but how did you sell it to your editors  Anders Fjellberg  It wasn't easy at first  because we weren't able to know what we actually could figure out. As soon as it became clear that we actually could be able to identify who the first one was  we basically got the message that we could do whatever we wanted  just travel wherever you need to go  do whatever you need to do  just get this done. BG  That's an editor taking responsibility. The story  by the way  has been translated and published across several European countries  and certainly will continue to do. And we want to read the updates from you. Thank you Anders. Thank you Tomm. As a singer songwriter  people often ask me about my influences or  as I like to call them  my sonic lineages. And I could easily tell you that I was shaped by the jazz and hip hop that I grew up with  by the Ethiopian heritage of my ancestors  or by the     s pop on my childhood radio stations. But beyond genre  there is another question  how do the sounds we hear every day influence the music that we make  I believe that everyday soundscape can be the most unexpected inspiration for songwriting  and to look at this idea a little bit more closely  I'm going to talk today about three things  nature  language and silence    or rather  the impossibility of true silence. And through this I hope to give you a sense of a world already alive with musical expression  with each of us serving as active participants  whether we know it or not. I'm going to start today with nature  but before we do that  let's quickly listen to this snippet of an opera singer warming up. Here it is. It's beautiful  isn't it  Gotcha  That is actually not the sound of an opera singer warming up. That is the sound of a bird slowed down to a pace that the human ear mistakenly recognizes as its own. It was released as part of Peter Sz ke's      Hungarian recording  The Unknown Music of Birds   where he records many birds and slows down their pitches to reveal what's underneath. Let's listen to the full speed recording. Now  let's hear the two of them together so your brain can juxtapose them. It's incredible. Perhaps the techniques of opera singing were inspired by birdsong. As humans  we intuitively understand birds to be our musical teachers. In Ethiopia  birds are considered an integral part of the origin of music itself. The story goes like this        years ago  a young man was born in the Empire of Aksum  a major trading center of the ancient world. His name was Yared. When Yared was seven years old his father died  and his mother sent him to go live with an uncle  who was a priest of the Ethiopian Orthodox tradition  one of the oldest churches in the world. Now  this tradition has an enormous amount of scholarship and learning  and Yared had to study and study and study and study  and one day he was studying under a tree  when three birds came to him. One by one  these birds became his teachers. They taught him music    scales  in fact. And Yared  eventually recognized as Saint Yared  used these scales to compose five volumes of chants and hymns for worship and celebration. And he used these scales to compose and to create an indigenous musical notation system. And these scales evolved into what is known as ki it  the unique  pentatonic  five note  modal system that is very much alive and thriving and still evolving in Ethiopia today. Now  I love this story because it's true at multiple levels. Saint Yared was a real  historical figure  and the natural world can be our musical teacher. And we have so many examples of this  the Pygmies of the Congo tune their instruments to the pitches of the birds in the forest around them. Musician and natural soundscape expert Bernie Krause describes how a healthy environment has animals and insects taking up low  medium and high frequency bands  in exactly the same way as a symphony does. And countless works of music were inspired by bird and forest song. Yes  the natural world can be our cultural teacher. So let's go now to the uniquely human world of language. Every language communicates with pitch to varying degrees  whether it's Mandarin Chinese  where a shift in melodic inflection gives the same phonetic syllable an entirely different meaning  to a language like English  where a raised pitch at the end of a sentence ... As an Ethiopian American woman  I grew up around the language of Amharic  Amhari a. It was my first language  the language of my parents  one of the main languages of Ethiopia. And there are a million reasons to fall in love with this language  its depth of poetics  its double entendres  its wax and gold  its humor  its proverbs that illuminate the wisdom and follies of life. But there's also this melodicism  a musicality built right in. And I find this distilled most clearly in what I like to call emphatic language    language that's meant to highlight or underline or that springs from surprise. Take  for example  the word   indey.  Now  if there are Ethiopians in the audience  they're probably chuckling to themselves  because the word means something like  No   or  How could he   or  No  he didn't.  It kind of depends on the situation. But when I was a kid  this was my very favorite word  and I think it's because it has a pitch. It has a melody. You can almost see the shape as it springs from someone's mouth.  Indey     it dips  and then raises again. And as a musician and composer  when I hear that word  something like this is floating through my mind. Or take  for example  the phrase for  It is right  or  It is correct      Lickih nehu ... Lickih nehu.  It's an affirmation  an agreement.  Lickih nehu.  When I hear that phrase  something like this starts rolling through my mind. And in both of those cases  what I did was I took the melody and the phrasing of those words and phrases and I turned them into musical parts to use in these short compositions. And I like to write bass lines  so they both ended up kind of as bass lines. Now  this is based on the work of Jason Moran and others who work intimately with music and language  but it's also something I've had in my head since I was a kid  how musical my parents sounded when they were speaking to each other and to us. It was from them and from Amhari a that I learned that we are awash in musical expression with every word  every sentence that we speak  every word  every sentence that we receive. Perhaps you can hear it in the words I'm speaking even now. Finally  we go to the     s United States and the most seminal work of   th century avant garde composition  John Cage's         written for any instrument or combination of instruments. The musician or musicians are invited to walk onto the stage with a stopwatch and open the score  which was actually purchased by the Museum of Modern Art    the score  that is. And this score has not a single note written and there is not a single note played for four minutes and    seconds. And  at once enraging and enrapturing  Cage shows us that even when there are no strings being plucked by fingers or hands hammering piano keys  still there is music  still there is music  still there is music. And what is this music  It was that sneeze in the back. It is the everyday soundscape that arises from the audience themselves  their coughs  their sighs  their rustles  their whispers  their sneezes  the room  the wood of the floors and the walls expanding and contracting  creaking and groaning with the heat and the cold  the pipes clanking and contributing. And controversial though it was  and even controversial though it remains  Cage's point is that there is no such thing as true silence. Even in the most silent environments  we still hear and feel the sound of our own heartbeats. The world is alive with musical expression. We are already immersed. Now  I had my own moment of  let's say  remixing John Cage a couple of months ago when I was standing in front of the stove cooking lentils. And it was late one night and it was time to stir  so I lifted the lid off the cooking pot  and I placed it onto the kitchen counter next to me  and it started to roll back and forth making this sound. And it stopped me cold. I thought   What a weird  cool swing that cooking pan lid has.  So when the lentils were ready and eaten  I hightailed it to my backyard studio  and I made this. Now  John Cage wasn't instructing musicians to mine the soundscape for sonic textures to turn into music. He was saying that on its own  the environment is musically generative  that it is generous  that it is fertile  that we are already immersed. Musician  music researcher  surgeon and human hearing expert Charles Limb is a professor at Johns Hopkins University and he studies music and the brain. And he has a theory that it is possible    it is possible    that the human auditory system actually evolved to hear music  because it is so much more complex than it needs to be for language alone. And if that's true  it means that we're hard wired for music  that we can find it anywhere  that there is no such thing as a musical desert  that we are permanently hanging out at the oasis  and that is marvelous. We can add to the soundtrack  but it's already playing. And it doesn't mean don't study music. Study music  trace your sonic lineages and enjoy that exploration. But there is a kind of sonic lineage to which we all belong. So the next time you are seeking percussion inspiration  look no further than your tires  as they roll over the unusual grooves of the freeway  or the top right burner of your stove and that strange way that it clicks as it is preparing to light. When seeking melodic inspiration  look no further than dawn and dusk avian orchestras or to the natural lilt of emphatic language. We are the audience and we are the composers and we take from these pieces we are given. We make  we make  we make  we make  knowing that when it comes to nature or language or soundscape  there is no end to the inspiration    if we are listening. Thank you. Father Daniel Berrigan once said that  writing about prisoners is a little like writing about the dead.  I think what he meant is that we treat prisoners as ghosts. They're unseen and unheard. It's easy to simply ignore them and it's even easier when the government goes to great lengths to keep them hidden. As a journalist  I think these stories of what people in power do when no one is watching  are precisely the stories that we need to tell. That's why I began investigating the most secretive and experimental prison units in the United States  for so called  second tier  terrorists. The government calls these units Communications Management Units or CMUs. Prisoners and guards call them  Little Guantanamo.  They are islands unto themselves. But unlike Gitmo they exist right here  at home  floating within larger federal prisons. There are   CMUs. One was opened inside the prison in Terre Haute  Indiana  and the other is inside this prison  in Marion  Illinois. Neither of them underwent the formal review process that is required by law when they were opened. CMU prisoners have all been convicted of crimes. Some of their cases are questionable and some involve threats and violence. I'm not here to argue the guilt or innocence of any prisoner. I'm here because as Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall said   When the prisons and gates slam shut  prisoners do not lose their human quality.  Every prisoner I've interviewed has said there are three flecks of light in the darkness of prison  phone calls  letters and visits from family. CMUs aren't solitary confinement  but they radically restrict all of these to levels that meet or exceed the most extreme prisons in the United States. Their phone calls can be limited to    minutes a month  compared to the     minutes other prisoners receive. Their letters can be limited to six pieces of paper. Their visits can be limited to four hours per month  compared to the    hours that people like Olympic Park bomber Eric Rudolph receive in the supermax. On top of that  CMU visits are non contact which means prisoners are not allowed to even hug their family. As one CMU prisoner said   We're not being tortured here  except psychologically.  The government won't say who is imprisoned here. But through court documents  open records requests and interviews with current and former prisoners  some small windows into the CMUs have opened. There's an estimated    to    prisoners here  and they're overwhelmingly Muslim. They include people like Dr. Rafil Dhafir  who violated the economic sanctions on Iraq by sending medical supplies for the children there. They've included people like Yassin Aref. Aref and his family fled to New York from Saddam Hussein's Iraq as refugees. He was arrested in      as part of an FBI sting. Aref is an imam and he was asked to bear witness to a loan  which is a tradition in Islamic culture. It turned out that one of the people involved in the loan was trying to enlist someone else in a fake attack. Aref didn't know. For that  he was convicted of conspiracy to provide material support to a terrorist group. The CMUs also include some non Muslim prisoners. The guards call them  balancers   meaning they help balance out the racial numbers  in hopes of deflecting law suits. These balancers include animal rights and environmental activists like Daniel McGowan. McGowan was convicted of participating in two arsons in the name of defending the environment as part of the Earth Liberation Front. During his sentencing  he was afraid that he would be sent to a rumored secret prison for terrorists. The judge dismissed all those fears  saying that they weren't supported by any facts. But that might be because the government hasn't fully explained why some prisoners end up in a CMU  and who is responsible for these decisions. When McGowan was transferred  he was told it's because he is a  domestic terrorist   a term the FBI uses repeatedly when talking about environmental activists. Now  keep in mind there are about     prisoners in US prisons who are classified as terrorists  and only a handful of them are in the CMUs. In McGowan's case  he was previously at a low security prison and he had no communications violations. So  why was he moved  Like other CMU prisoners  McGowan repeatedly asked for an answer  a hearing  or some opportunity for an appeal. This example from another prisoner shows how those requests are viewed.  Wants a transfer.   Told him no.  At one point  the prison warden himself recommended McGowan's transfer out of the CMU citing his good behavior  but the warden was overruled by the Bureau of Prison's Counterterrorism Unit  working with the Joint Terrorism Task Force of the FBI. Later I found out that McGowan was really sent to a CMU not because of what he did  but what he has said. A memo from the Counterterrorism Unit cited McGowan's  anti government beliefs.  While imprisoned  he continued writing about environmental issues  saying that activists must reflect on their mistakes and listen to each other. Now  in fairness  if you've spent any time at all in Washington  DC  you know this is really a radical concept for the government. I actually asked to visit McGowan in the CMU. And I was approved. That came as quite a shock. First  because as I've discussed on this stage before  I learned that the FBI has been monitoring my work. Second  because it would make me the first and only journalist to visit a CMU. I had even learned through the Bureau of Prisons Counterterrorism Unit  that they had been monitoring my speeches about CMUs  like this one. So how could I possibly be approved to visit  A few days before I went out to the prison  I got an answer. I was allowed to visit McGowan as a friend  not a journalist. Journalists are not allowed here. McGowan was told by CMU officials that if I asked any questions or published any story  that he would be punished for my reporting. When I arrived for our visit  the guards reminded me that they knew who I was and knew about my work. And they said that if I attempted to interview McGowan  the visit would be terminated. The Bureau of Prisons describes CMUs as  self contained housing units.  But I think that's an Orwellian way of describing black holes. When you visit a CMU  you go through all the security checkpoints that you would expect. But then the walk to the visitation room is silent. When a CMU prisoner has a visit  the rest of the prison is on lockdown. I was ushered into a small room  so small my outstretched arms could touch each wall. There was a grapefruit sized orb in the ceiling for the visit to be live monitored by the Counterterrorism Unit in West Virginia. The unit insists that all the visits have to be in English for CMU prisoners  which is an additional hardship for many of the Muslim families. There is a thick sheet of foggy  bulletproof glass and on the other side was Daniel McGowan. We spoke through these handsets attached to the wall and talked about books and movies. We did our best to find reasons to laugh. To fight boredom and amuse himself while in the CMU  McGowan had been spreading a rumor that I was secretly the president of a Twilight fan club in Washington  DC For the record  I'm not. But I kind of the hope the FBI now thinks that Bella and Edward are terrorist code names. During our visit  McGowan spoke most and at length about his niece Lily  his wife Jenny and how torturous it feels to never be able to hug them  to never be able to hold their hands. Three months after our visit  McGowan was transferred out of the CMU and then  without warning  he was sent back again. I had published leaked CMU documents on my website and the Counterterrorism Unit said that McGowan had called his wife and asked her to mail them. He wanted to see what the government was saying about him  and for that he was sent back to the CMU. When he was finally released at the end of his sentence  his story got even more Kafkaesque. He wrote an article for the Huffington Post headlined   Court Documents Prove I was Sent to a CMU for my Political Speech.  The next day he was thrown back in jail for his political speech. His attorneys quickly secured his release  but the message was very clear  Don't talk about this place. Today  nine years after they were opened by the Bush administration  the government is codifying how and why CMUs were created. According to the Bureau of Prisons  they are for prisoners with  inspirational significance.  I think that is very nice way of saying these are political prisons for political prisoners. Prisoners are sent to a CMU because of their race  their religion or their political beliefs. Now  if you think that characterization is too strong  just look at some of the government's own documents. When some of McGowan's mail was rejected by the CMU  the sender was told it's because the letters were intended  for political prisoners.  When another prisoner  animal rights activist Andy Stepanian  was sent to a CMU  it was because of his anti government and anti corporate views. Now  I know all of this may be hard to believe  that it's happening right now  and in the United States. But the unknown reality is that the US has a dark history of disproportionately punishing people because of their political beliefs. In the     s  before Marion was home to the CMU  it was home to the notorious Control Unit. Prisoners were locked down in solitary for    hours a day. The warden said the unit was to  control revolutionary attitudes.  In the     s  another experiment called the Lexington High Security Unit held women connected to the Weather Underground  Black Liberation and Puerto Rican independent struggles. The prison radically restricted communication and used sleep deprivation  and constant light for so called  ideological conversion.  Those prisons were eventually shut down  but only through the campaigning of religious groups and human rights advocates  like Amnesty International. Today  civil rights lawyers with the Center for Constitutional Rights are challenging CMUs in court for depriving prisoners of their due process rights and for retaliating against them for their protected political and religious speech. Many of these documents would have never come to light without this lawsuit. The message of these groups and my message for you today is that we must bear witness to what is being done to these prisoners. Their treatment is a reflection of the values held beyond prison walls. This story is not just about prisoners. It is about us. It is about our own commitment to human rights. It is about whether we will choose to stop repeating the mistakes of our past. If we don't listen to what Father Berrigan described as the stories of the dead  they will soon become the stories of ourselves. Thank you. Tom Rielly  I have a couple questions. When I was in high school  I learned about the Bill of Rights  the Constitution  freedom of speech  due process and  about    other laws and rights that seem to be violated by this. How could this possibly be happening  Will Potter  I think that's the number one question I get throughout all of my work  and the short answer is that people don't know. I think the solution to any of these types of situations  any rights abuses  are really dependent on two things. They're dependent on knowledge that it's actually happening and then a means and efficacy to actually make a change. And unfortunately with these prisoners  one  people don't know what's happening at all and then they're already disenfranchised populations who don't have access to attorneys  not native English speakers. In some of these cases  they have great representation that I mentioned  but there's just not a public awareness of what's happening. TR  Isn't it guaranteed in prison that you have right to council or access to council  WP  There's a tendency in our culture to see when people have been convicted of a crime  no matter if that charge was bogus or legitimate  that whatever happens to them after that is warranted. And I think that's a really damaging and dangerous narrative that we have  that allows these types of things to happen  as the general public just kind of turns a blind eye to it. TR  All those documents on screen were all real documents  word for word  unchanged at all  right  WP  Absolutely. I've actually uploaded all of them to my website. It's willpotter.com CMU and it's a footnoted version of the talk  so you can see the documents for yourself without the little snippets. You can see the full version. I relied overwhelmingly on primary source documents or on primary interviews with former and current prisoners  with people that are dealing with this situation every day. And like I said  I've been there myself  as well. TR  You're doing courageous work. WP  Thank you very much. Thank you all. A few years ago  with my colleague  Emmanuelle Charpentier  I invented a new technology for editing genomes. It's called CRISPR Cas . The CRISPR technology allows scientists to make changes to the DNA in cells that could allow us to cure genetic disease. You might be interested to know that the CRISPR technology came about through a basic research project that was aimed at discovering how bacteria fight viral infections. Bacteria have to deal with viruses in their environment  and we can think about a viral infection like a ticking time bomb    a bacterium has only a few minutes to defuse the bomb before it gets destroyed. So  many bacteria have in their cells an adaptive immune system called CRISPR  that allows them to detect viral DNA and destroy it. Part of the CRISPR system is a protein called Cas   that's able to seek out  cut and eventually degrade viral DNA in a specific way. And it was through our research to understand the activity of this protein  Cas   that we realized that we could harness its function as a genetic engineering technology    a way for scientists to delete or insert specific bits of DNA into cells with incredible precision    that would offer opportunities to do things that really haven't been possible in the past. The CRISPR technology has already been used to change the DNA in the cells of mice and monkeys  other organisms as well. Chinese scientists showed recently that they could even use the CRISPR technology to change genes in human embryos. And scientists in Philadelphia showed they could use CRISPR to remove the DNA of an integrated HIV virus from infected human cells. The opportunity to do this kind of genome editing also raises various ethical issues that we have to consider  because this technology can be employed not only in adult cells  but also in the embryos of organisms  including our own species. And so  together with my colleagues  I've called for a global conversation about the technology that I co invented  so that we can consider all of the ethical and societal implications of a technology like this. What I want to do now is tell you what the CRISPR technology is  what it can do  where we are today and why I think we need to take a prudent path forward in the way that we employ this technology. When viruses infect a cell  they inject their DNA. And in a bacterium  the CRISPR system allows that DNA to be plucked out of the virus  and inserted in little bits into the chromosome    the DNA of the bacterium. And these integrated bits of viral DNA get inserted at a site called CRISPR. CRISPR stands for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats. A big mouthful    you can see why we use the acronym CRISPR. It's a mechanism that allows cells to record  over time  the viruses they have been exposed to. And importantly  those bits of DNA are passed on to the cells' progeny  so cells are protected from viruses not only in one generation  but over many generations of cells. This allows the cells to keep a record of infection  and as my colleague  Blake Wiedenheft  likes to say  the CRISPR locus is effectively a genetic vaccination card in cells. Once those bits of DNA have been inserted into the bacterial chromosome  the cell then makes a little copy of a molecule called RNA  which is orange in this picture  that is an exact replicate of the viral DNA. RNA is a chemical cousin of DNA  and it allows interaction with DNA molecules that have a matching sequence. So those little bits of RNA from the CRISPR locus associate    they bind    to protein called Cas   which is white in the picture  and form a complex that functions like a sentinel in the cell. It searches through all of the DNA in the cell  to find sites that match the sequences in the bound RNAs. And when those sites are found    as you can see here  the blue molecule is DNA    this complex associates with that DNA and allows the Cas  cleaver to cut up the viral DNA. It makes a very precise break. So we can think of the Cas  RNA sentinel complex like a pair of scissors that can cut DNA    it makes a double stranded break in the DNA helix. And importantly  this complex is programmable  so it can be programmed to recognize particular DNA sequences  and make a break in the DNA at that site. As I'm going to tell you now  we recognized that that activity could be harnessed for genome engineering  to allow cells to make a very precise change to the DNA at the site where this break was introduced. That's sort of analogous to the way that we use a word processing program to fix a typo in a document. The reason we envisioned using the CRISPR system for genome engineering is because cells have the ability to detect broken DNA and repair it. So when a plant or an animal cell detects a double stranded break in its DNA  it can fix that break  either by pasting together the ends of the broken DNA with a little  tiny change in the sequence of that position  or it can repair the break by integrating a new piece of DNA at the site of the cut. So if we have a way to introduce double stranded breaks into DNA at precise places  we can trigger cells to repair those breaks  by either the disruption or incorporation of new genetic information. So if we were able to program the CRISPR technology to make a break in DNA at the position at or near a mutation causing cystic fibrosis  for example  we could trigger cells to repair that mutation. Genome engineering is actually not new  it's been in development since the     s. We've had technologies for sequencing DNA  for copying DNA  and even for manipulating DNA. And these technologies were very promising  but the problem was that they were either inefficient  or they were difficult enough to use that most scientists had not adopted them for use in their own laboratories  or certainly for many clinical applications. So  the opportunity to take a technology like CRISPR and utilize it has appeal  because of its relative simplicity. We can think of older genome engineering technologies as similar to having to rewire your computer each time you want to run a new piece of software  whereas the CRISPR technology is like software for the genome  we can program it easily  using these little bits of RNA. So once a double stranded break is made in DNA  we can induce repair  and thereby potentially achieve astounding things  like being able to correct mutations that cause sickle cell anemia or cause Huntington's Disease. I actually think that the first applications of the CRISPR technology are going to happen in the blood  where it's relatively easier to deliver this tool into cells  compared to solid tissues. Right now  a lot of the work that's going on applies to animal models of human disease  such as mice. The technology is being used to make very precise changes that allow us to study the way that these changes in the cell's DNA affect either a tissue or  in this case  an entire organism. Now in this example  the CRISPR technology was used to disrupt a gene by making a tiny change in the DNA in a gene that is responsible for the black coat color of these mice. Imagine that these white mice differ from their pigmented litter mates by just a tiny change at one gene in the entire genome  and they're otherwise completely normal. And when we sequence the DNA from these animals  we find that the change in the DNA has occurred at exactly the place where we induced it  using the CRISPR technology. Additional experiments are going on in other animals that are useful for creating models for human disease  such as monkeys. And here we find that we can use these systems to test the application of this technology in particular tissues  for example  figuring out how to deliver the CRISPR tool into cells. We also want to understand better how to control the way that DNA is repaired after it's cut  and also to figure out how to control and limit any kind of off target  or unintended effects of using the technology. I think that we will see clinical application of this technology  certainly in adults  within the next    years. I think that it's likely that we will see clinical trials and possibly even approved therapies within that time  which is a very exciting thing to think about. And because of the excitement around this technology  there's a lot of interest in start up companies that have been founded to commercialize the CRISPR technology  and lots of venture capitalists that have been investing in these companies. But we have to also consider that the CRISPR technology can be used for things like enhancement. Imagine that we could try to engineer humans that have enhanced properties  such as stronger bones  or less susceptibility to cardiovascular disease or even to have properties that we would consider maybe to be desirable  like a different eye color or to be taller  things like that.  Designer humans   if you will. Right now  the genetic information to understand what types of genes would give rise to these traits is mostly not known. But it's important to know that the CRISPR technology gives us a tool to make such changes  once that knowledge becomes available. This raises a number of ethical questions that we have to carefully consider  and this is why I and my colleagues have called for a global pause in any clinical application of the CRISPR technology in human embryos  to give us time to really consider all of the various implications of doing so. And actually  there is an important precedent for such a pause from the     s  when scientists got together to call for a moratorium on the use of molecular cloning  until the safety of that technology could be tested carefully and validated. So  genome engineered humans are not with us yet  but this is no longer science fiction. Genome engineered animals and plants are happening right now. And this puts in front of all of us a huge responsibility  to consider carefully both the unintended consequences as well as the intended impacts of a scientific breakthrough. Thank you. Bruno Giussani  Jennifer  this is a technology with huge consequences  as you pointed out. Your attitude about asking for a pause or a moratorium or a quarantine is incredibly responsible. There are  of course  the therapeutic results of this  but then there are the un therapeutic ones and they seem to be the ones gaining traction  particularly in the media. This is one of the latest issues of The Economist     Editing humanity.  It's all about genetic enhancement  it's not about therapeutics. What kind of reactions did you get back in March from your colleagues in the science world  when you asked or suggested that we should actually pause this for a moment and think about it  Jennifer Doudna  My colleagues were actually  I think  delighted to have the opportunity to discuss this openly. It's interesting that as I talk to people  my scientific colleagues as well as others  there's a wide variety of viewpoints about this. So clearly it's a topic that needs careful consideration and discussion. BG  There's a big meeting happening in December that you and your colleagues are calling  together with the National Academy of Sciences and others  what do you hope will come out of the meeting  practically  JD  Well  I hope that we can air the views of many different individuals and stakeholders who want to think about how to use this technology responsibly. It may not be possible to come up with a consensus point of view  but I think we should at least understand what all the issues are as we go forward. BG  Now  colleagues of yours  like George Church  for example  at Harvard  they say   Yeah  ethical issues basically are just a question of safety. We test and test and test again  in animals and in labs  and then once we feel it's safe enough  we move on to humans.  So that's kind of the other school of thought  that we should actually use this opportunity and really go for it. Is there a possible split happening in the science community about this  I mean  are we going to see some people holding back because they have ethical concerns  and some others just going forward because some countries under regulate or don't regulate at all  JD  Well  I think with any new technology  especially something like this  there are going to be a variety of viewpoints  and I think that's perfectly understandable. I think that in the end  this technology will be used for human genome engineering  but I think to do that without careful consideration and discussion of the risks and potential complications would not be responsible. BG  There are a lot of technologies and other fields of science that are developing exponentially  pretty much like yours. I'm thinking about artificial intelligence  autonomous robots and so on. No one seems    aside from autonomous warfare robots    nobody seems to have launched a similar discussion in those fields  in calling for a moratorium. Do you think that your discussion may serve as a blueprint for other fields  JD  Well  I think it's hard for scientists to get out of the laboratory. Speaking for myself  it's a little bit uncomfortable to do that. But I do think that being involved in the genesis of this really puts me and my colleagues in a position of responsibility. And I would say that I certainly hope that other technologies will be considered in the same way  just as we would want to consider something that could have implications in other fields besides biology. BG  Jennifer  thanks for coming to TED. JD  Thank you. I'd like to start by asking you all to go to your happy place  please. Yes  your happy place  I know you've got one even if it's fake. OK  so  comfortable  Good. Now I'd like to you to mentally answer the following questions. Is there any strip lighting in your happy place  Any plastic tables  Polyester flooring  Mobile phones  No  I think we all know that our happy place is meant to be somewhere natural  outdoors    on a beach  fireside. We'll be reading or eating or knitting. And we're surrounded by natural light and organic elements. Natural things make us happy. And happiness is a great motivator  we strive for happiness. Perhaps that's why we're always redesigning everything  in the hopes that our solutions might feel more natural. So let's start there    with the idea that good design should feel natural. Your phone is not very natural. And you probably think you're addicted to your phone  but you're really not. We're not addicted to devices  we're addicted to the information that flows through them. I wonder how long you would be happy in your happy place without any information from the outside world. I'm interested in how we access that information  how we experience it. We're moving from a time of static information  held in books and libraries and bus stops  through a period of digital information  towards a period of fluid information  where your children will expect to be able to access anything  anywhere at any time  from quantum physics to medieval viticulture  from gender theory to tomorrow's weather  just like switching on a lightbulb    Imagine that. Humans also like simple tools. Your phone is not a very simple tool. A fork is a simple tool. And we don't like them made of plastic  in the same way I don't really like my phone very much    it's not how I want to experience information. I think there are better solutions than a world mediated by screens. I don't hate screens  but I don't feel    and I don't think any of us feel that good about how much time we spend slouched over them. Fortunately  the big tech companies seem to agree. They're actually heavily invested in touch and speech and gesture  and also in senses    things that can turn dumb objects  like cups  and imbue them with the magic of the Internet  potentially turning this digital cloud into something we might touch and move. The parents in crisis over screen time need physical digital toys teaching their kids to read  as well as family safe app stores. And I think  actually  that's already really happening. Reality is richer than screens. For example  I love books. For me they are time machines    atoms and molecules bound in space  from the moment of their creation to the moment of my experience. But frankly  the content's identical on my phone. So what makes this a richer experience than a screen  I mean  scientifically. We need screens  of course. I'm going to show film  I need the enormous screen. But there's more than you can do with these magic boxes. Your phone is not the Internet's door bitch. We can build things    physical things  using physics and pixels  that can integrate the Internet into the world around us. And I'm going to show you a few examples of those. A while ago  I got to work with a design agency  Berg  on an exploration of what the Internet without screens might actually look like. And they showed us a range ways that light can work with simple senses and physical objects to really bring the Internet to life  to make it tangible. Like this wonderfully mechanical YouTube player. And this was an inspiration to me. Next I worked with the Japanese agency  AQ  on a research project into mental health. We wanted to create an object that could capture the subjective data around mood swings that's so essential to diagnosis. This object captures your touch  so you might press it very hard if you're angry  or stroke it if you're calm. It's like a digital emoji stick. And then you might revisit those moments later  and add context to them online. Most of all  we wanted to create an intimate  beautiful thing that could live in your pocket and be loved. The binoculars are actually a birthday present for the Sydney Opera House's   th anniversary. Our friends at Tellart in Boston brought over a pair of street binoculars  the kind you might find on the Empire State Building  and they fitted them with     degree views of other iconic world heritage sights    using Street View. And then we stuck them under the steps. So  they became this very physical  simple reappropriation  or like a portal to these other icons. So you might see Versailles or Shackleton's Hut. Basically  it's virtual reality circa     . In our office we use hacky sacks to exchange URLs. This is incredibly simple  it's like your Opal card. You basically put a website on the little chip in here  and then you do this and ... bosh     the website appears on your phone. It's about    cents. Treehugger is a project that we're working on with Grumpy Sailor and Finch  here in Sydney. And I'm very excited about what might happen when you pull the phones apart and you put the bits into trees  and that my children might have an opportunity to visit an enchanted forest guided by a magic wand  where they could talk to digital fairies and ask them questions  and be asked questions in return. As you can see  we're at the cardboard stage with this one. But I'm very excited by the possibility of getting kids back outside without screens  but with all the powerful magic of the Internet at their fingertips. And we hope to have something like this working by the end of the year. So let's recap. Humans like natural solutions. Humans love information. Humans need simple tools. These principles should underpin how we design for the future  not just for the Internet. You may feel uncomfortable about the age of information that we're moving into. You may feel challenged  rather than simply excited. Guess what  Me too. It's a really extraordinary period of human history. We are the people that actually build our world  there are no artificial intelligences... yet. It's us    designers  architects  artists  engineers. And if we challenge ourselves  I think that actually we can have a happy place filled with the information we love that feels as natural and as simple as switching on lightbulb. And although it may seem inevitable  that what the public wants is watches and websites and widgets  maybe we could give a bit of thought to cork and light and hacky sacks. Thank you very much. I would like to invite you to come along on a visit to a dark continent. It is the continent hidden under the surface of the earth. It is largely unexplored  poorly understood  and the stuff of legends. But it is made also of dramatic landscapes like this huge underground chamber  and it is rich with surprising biological and mineralogical worlds. Thanks to the efforts of intrepid voyagers in the last three centuries    actually  we know also thanks to satellite technology  of course    we know almost every single square meter of our planet's surface. However  we know still very little about what is hidden inside the earth. Because a cave landscape  like this deep shaft in Italy  is hidden  the potential of cave exploration    the geographical dimension    is poorly understood and unappreciated. Because we are creatures living on the surface  our perception of the inner side of the planet is in some ways skewed  as is that of the depth of the oceans or of the upper atmosphere. However  since systematic cave exploration started about one century ago  we know actually that caves exist in every continent of the world. A single cave system  like Mammoth Cave  which is in Kentucky  can be as long as more than     kilometers. And an abyss like Krubera Voronya  which is in the Caucasus region  actually the deepest cave explored in the world  can go as far as more than       meters below the surface. That means a journey of weeks for a cave explorer. Caves form in karstic regions. So karstic regions are areas of the world where the infiltrating water along cracks  fractures  can easily dissolve soluble lithologies  forming a drainage system of tunnels  conduits    a three dimensional network  actually. Karstic regions cover almost    percent of the continents' surface  and we know actually that speleologists in the last    years have explored roughly        kilometers of cave passages around the world  which is a big number. But geologists have estimated that what is still missing  to be discovered and mapped  is something around    million kilometers. That means that for each meter of a cave that we already know  that we have explored  there are still some tens of kilometers of undiscovered passages. That means that this is really an endless continent  and we will never be able to explore it completely. And this estimation is made without considering other types of caves  like  for example  inside glaciers or even volcanic caves  which are not karstic  but are formed by lava flows. And if we have a look at other planets like  for example  Mars  you will see that this characteristic is not so specific of our home planet. However  I will show to you now that we do not need to go to Mars to explore alien worlds. I'm a speleologist  that means a cave explorer. And I started with this passion when I was really young in the mountains not far from my hometown in North Italy  in the karstic regions of the Alps and the Dolomites. But soon  the quest for exploration brought me to the farthest corner of the planet  searching for new potential entrances of this undiscovered continent. And in       I had the opportunity to visit the tepui table mountains  which are in the Orinoco and Amazon basins. These massifs enchanted me from the first time I saw them. They are surrounded by vertical  vertiginous rock walls with silvery waterfalls that are lost in the forest. They really inspired in me a sense of wilderness  with a soul older than millions and millions of years. And this dramatic landscape inspired among other things also Conan Doyle's  The Lost World  novel in     . And they are  really  a lost world. Scientists consider those mountains as islands in time  being separated from the surrounding lowlands since tens of millions of years ago. They are surrounded by up to       meter high walls  resembling a fortress  impregnable by humans. And  in fact  only a few of these mountains have been climbed and explored on their top. These mountains contain also a scientific paradox  They are made by quartz  which is a very common mineral on the earth's crust  and the rock made up by quartz is called quartzite  and quartzite is one of the hardest and least soluble minerals on earth. So we do not expect at all to find a cave there. Despite this  in the last    years  speleologists from Italy  Slovakia  Czech Republic  and  of course  Venezuela and Brazil  have explored several caves in this area. So how can it be possible  To understand this contradiction  we have to consider the time factor  because the history of the tepuis is extremely long  starting about  .  billion years ago with the formation of the rock  and then evolving with the uplift of the region     million years ago  after the disruption of the Pangaea supercontinent and the opening of the Atlantic Ocean. So you can imagine that the water had tens or even hundreds of millions of years to sculpt the strangest forms on the tepuis' surfaces  but also to open the fractures and form stone cities  rock cities  fields of towers which are characterized in the famous landscape of the tepuis. But nobody could have imagined what was happening inside a mountain in so long a time frame. And so I was focusing in      on one of those massifs  the Auy n tepui  which is very famous because it hosts Angel Falls  which is the highest waterfall in the world    about     meters of vertical drop. And I was searching for hints of the existence of cave systems through satellite images  and finally we identified an area of collapses of the surface    so  big boulders  rock piles    and that means that there was a void below. It was a clear indication that there was something inside the mountain. So we did several attempts to reach this area  by land and with a helicopter  but it was really difficult because    you have to imagine that these mountains are covered by clouds most of the year  by fog. There are strong winds  and there are almost       millimeters of rainfall per year  so it's really  really difficult to find good conditions. And only in      we finally landed on the spot and we started the exploration of the cave. The cave is huge. It's a huge network under the surface of the tepui plateau  and in only ten days of expedition  we explored more than    kilometers of cave passages. And it's a huge network of underground rivers  channels  big rooms  extremely deep shafts. So it's really an incredible place. And we named it Imawar  Yeuta. That means  in the Pem n indigenous language   The House of the Gods.  You have to imagine that indigenous people have never been there. It was impossible for them to reach this area. However  there were legends about the existence of a cave in the mountain. So when we started the exploration  we had to explore with a great respect  both because of the religious beliefs of the indigenous people  but also because it was really a sacred place  because no human had entered there before. So we had to use special protocols to not contaminate the environment with our presence  and we tried also to share with the community  with the indigenous community  our discoveries. And the caves represent  really  a snapshot of the past. The time needed for their formation could be as long as    or even     million years  which makes them possibly the oldest caves that we can explore on earth. What you can find there is really evidence of a lost world. When you enter a quartzite cave  you have to completely forget what you know about caves    classic limestone caves or the touristic caves that you can visit in several places in the world. Because what seems a simple stalactite here is not made by calcium carbonate  but is made by opal  and one of those stalactites can require tens of millions of years to be formed. But you can find even stranger forms  like these mushrooms of silica growing on a boulder. And you can imagine our talks when we were exploring the cave. We were the first entering and discovering those unknown things  things like those monster eggs. And we were a bit scared because it was all a discovery  and we didn't want to find a dinosaur. We didn't find a dinosaur. Anyway  actually  we know that this kind of formation  after several studies  we know that these kinds of formations are living organisms. They are bacterial colonies using silica to build mineral structures resembling stromatolites. Stromatolites are some of the oldest forms of life that we can find on earth. And here in the tepuis  the interesting thing is that these bacteria colonies have evolved in complete isolation from the external surface  and without being in contact with humans. They have never been in contact with humans. So the implications for science are enormous  because here you could find  for example  microbes that could be useful to resolve diseases in medicine  or you could find even a new kind of material with unknown properties. And  in fact  we discovered in the cave a new mineral structure for science  which is rossiantonite  a phosphate sulfate. So whatever you find in the cave  even a small cricket  has evolved in the dark in complete isolation. And  really  everything that you can feel in the cave are real connections between the biological and the mineralogical world. So as we explore this dark continent and discover its mineralogical and biological diversity and uniqueness  we will find probably clues about the origin of life on our planet and on the relationship and evolution of life in relationship with the mineral world. What seems only a dark  empty environment could be in reality a chest of wonders full of useful information. With a team of Italian  Venezuelan and Brazilian speleologists  which is called La Venta Teraphosa  we will be back soon to Latin America  because we want to explore other tepuis in the farthest areas of the Amazon. There are still very unknown mountains  like Marahuaca  which is almost       meters high above sea level  or Arac   which is in the upper region of Rio Negro in Brazil. And we suppose that we could find there even bigger cave systems  and each one with its own undiscovered world. Thank you. Bruno Giussani  Thank you  Francesco. Give me that to start so we don't forget. Francesco  you said we don't need to go to Mars to find alien life  and indeed  last time we spoke  you were in Sardinia and you were training European astronauts. So what do you  a speleologist  tell and teach to the astronauts  Francesco Sauro  Yeah  we are    it's a program of training for not only European  but also NASA  Roskosmos  JAXA astronauts  in a cave. So they stay in a cave for about one week in isolation. They have to work together in a real  real dangerous environment  and it's a real alien environment for them because it's unusual. It's always dark. They have to do science. They have a lot of tasks. And it's very similar to a journey to Mars or the International Space Station. BG  In principle. FS  Yes. BG  I want to go back to one of the pictures that was in your slide show  and it's just representative of the other photos    Weren't those photos amazing  Yeah  Audience  Yeah  FS  I have to thank the photographers from the team La Venta  because all of those photos are from the photographers. BG  You bring  actually  photographers with you in the expedition. They're professionals  they're speleologists and photographers. But when I look at these pictures  I wonder  there is zero light down there  and yet they look incredibly well exposed. How do you take these pictures  How do your colleagues  the photographers  take these pictures  FS  Yeah. They are working in a darkroom  basically  so you can open the shutter of the camera and use the lights to paint the environment. BG  So you're basically    FS  Yes. You can even keep the shutter open for one minute and then paint the environment. The final result is what you want to achieve. BG  You spray the environment with light and that's what you get. Maybe we can try this at home someday  I don't know. BG  Francesco  grazie. FS  Grazie. I want to tell you three stories about the power of relationships to solve the deep and complex social problems of this century. You know  sometimes it seems like all these problems of poverty  inequality  ill health  unemployment  violence  addiction    they're right there in one person's life. So I want to tell you about someone like this that I know. I'm going to call her Ella. Ella lives in a British city on a run down estate. The shops are closed  the pub's gone  the playground's pretty desolate and never used  and inside Ella's house  the tension is palpable and the noise levels are deafening. The TV's on at full volume. One of her sons is fighting with one of her daughters. Another son  Ryan  is keeping up this constant stream of abuse from the kitchen  and the dogs are locked behind the bedroom door and straining. Ella is stuck. She has lived with crisis for    years. She knows nothing else  and she knows no way out. She's had a whole series of abusive partners  and  tragically  one of her children has been taken into care by social services. The three children that still live with her suffer from a whole range of problems  and none of them are in education. And Ella says to me that she is repeating the cycle of her own mother's life before her. But when I met Ella  there were    different services on offer for her and her family in the city where she lives     different services run out of    departments in one city  and Ella and her partners and her children were known to most of them. They think nothing of calling social services to try and mediate one of the many arguments that broke out. And the family home was visited on a regular basis by social workers  youth workers  a health officer  a housing officer  a home tutor and the local policemen. And the governments say that there are         families in Britain today like Ella's  struggling to break the cycle of economic  social and environmental deprivation. And they also say that managing this problem costs a quarter of a million pounds per family per year and yet nothing changes. None of these well meaning visitors are making a difference. This is a chart we made in the same city with another family like Ella's. This shows    years of intervention in that family's life. And just as with Ella  not one of these interventions is part of an overall plan. There's no end goal in sight. None of the interventions are dealing with the underlying issues. These are just containment measures  ways of managing a problem. One of the policemen says to me   Look  I just deliver the message and then I leave.  So  I've spent time living with families like Ella's in different parts of the world  because I want to know  what can we learn from places where our social institutions just aren't working  I want to know what it feels like to live in Ella's family. I want to know what's going on and what we can do differently. Well  the first thing I learned is that cost is a really slippery concept. Because when the government says that a family like Ella's costs a quarter of a million pounds a year to manage  what it really means is that this system costs a quarter of a million pounds a year. Because not one penny of this money actually touches Ella's family in a way that makes a difference. Instead  the system is just like this costly gyroscope that spins around the families  keeping them stuck at its heart  exactly where they are. And I also spent time with the frontline workers  and I learned that it is an impossible situation. So Tom  who is the social worker for Ella's    year old son Ryan  has to spend    percent of his time servicing the system  meetings with colleagues  filling out forms  more meetings with colleagues to discuss the forms  and maybe most shockingly  the    percent of the time he has to be with Ryan is spent getting data and information for the system. So he says to Ryan   How often have you been smoking  Have you been drinking  When did you go to school   And this kind of interaction rules out the possibility of a normal conversation. It rules out the possibility of what's needed to build a relationship between Tom and Ryan. When we made this chart  the frontline workers  the professionals    they stared at it absolutely amazed. It snaked around the walls of their offices. So many hours  so well meant  but ultimately so futile. And there was this moment of absolute breakdown  and then of clarity  we had to work in a different way. So in a really brave step  the leaders of the city where Ella lives agreed that we could start by reversing Ryan's ratio. So everyone who came into contact with Ella or a family like Ella's would spend    percent of their time working with the families and only    percent servicing the system. And even more radically  the families would lead and they would decide who was in a best position to help them. So Ella and another mother were asked to be part of an interview panel  to choose from amongst the existing professionals who would work with them. And many  many people wanted to join us  because you don't go into this kind of work to manage a system  you go in because you can and you want to make a difference. So Ella and the mother asked everybody who came through the door   What will you do when my son starts kicking me   And so the first person who comes in says   Well  I'll look around for the nearest exit and I will back out very slowly  and if the noise is still going on  I'll call my supervisor.  And the mothers go   You're the system. Get out of here   And then the next person who comes is a policeman  and he says   Well  I'll tackle your son to the ground and then I'm not sure what I'll do.  And the mothers say   Thank you.  So  they chose professionals who confessed they didn't necessarily have the answers  who said    well  they weren't going to talk in jargon. They showed their human qualities and convinced the mothers that they would stick with them through thick and thin  even though they wouldn't be soft with them. So these new teams and the families were then given a sliver of the former budget  but they could spend the money in any way they chose. And so one of the families went out for supper. They went to McDonald's and they sat down and they talked and they listened for the first time in a long time. Another family asked the team if they would help them do up their home. And one mother took the money and she used it as a float to start a social enterprise. And in a really short space of time  something new started to grow  a relationship between the team and the workers. And then some remarkable changes took place. Maybe it's not surprising that the journey for Ella has had some big steps backwards as well as forwards. But today  she's completed an IT training course  she has her first paid job  her children are back in school  and the neighbors  who previously just hoped this family would be moved anywhere except next door to them  are fine. They've made some new friendships. And all the same people have been involved in this transformation    same families  same workers. But the relationship between them has been supported to change. So I'm telling you about Ella because I think that relationships are the critical resource we have in solving some of these intractable problems. But today  our relationships are all but written off by our politics  our social policies  our welfare institutions. And I've learned that this really has to change. So what do I mean by relationships  I'm talking about the simple human bonds between us  a kind of authentic sense of connection  of belonging  the bonds that make us happy  that support us to change  to be brave like Ella and try something new. And  you know  it's no accident that those who run and work in the institutions that are supposed to support Ella and her family don't talk about relationships  because relationships are expressly designed out of a welfare model that was drawn up in Britain and exported around the world. The contemporaries of William Beveridge  who was the architect of the first welfare state and the author of the Beveridge Report  had little faith in what they called the average sensual or emotional man. Instead  they trusted this idea of the impersonal system and the bureaucrat who would be detached and work in this system. And the impact of Beveridge on the way the modern state sees social issues just can't be underestimated. The Beveridge Report sold over         copies in the first weeks of publication alone. People queued in the rain on a November night to get hold of a copy  and it was read across the country  across the colonies  across Europe  across the United States of America  and it had this huge impact on the way that welfare states were designed around the globe. The cultures  the bureaucracies  the institutions    they are global  and they've come to seem like common sense. They've become so ingrained in us  that actually we don't even see them anymore. And I think it's really important to say that in the   th century  they were remarkably successful  these institutions. They led to longer lifespans  the eradication of mass disease  mass housing  almost universal education. But at the same time  Beveridge sowed the seeds of today's challenges. So let me tell you a second story. What do you think today is a bigger killer than a lifetime of smoking  It's loneliness. According to government statistics  one person over       one in three    doesn't speak to or see another person in a week. One person in     that's         people  doesn't speak to anyone else in a month. And we're not the only people with this problem  this problem touches the whole of the Western world. And it's even more acute in countries like China  where a process of rapid urbanization  mass migration  has left older people alone in the villages. And so the services that Beveridge designed and exported    they can't address this kind of problem. Loneliness is like a collective relational challenge  and it can't be addressed by a traditional bureaucratic response. So some years ago  wanting to understand this problem  I started to work with a group of about    older people in South London  where I live. I went shopping  I played bingo  but mainly I was just observing and listening. I wanted to know what we could do differently. And if you ask them  people tell you they want two things. They want somebody to go up a ladder and change a light bulb  or to be there when they come out of hospital. They want on demand  practical support. And they want to have fun. They want to go out  do interesting things with like minded people  and make friends like we've all made friends at every stage of our lives. So we rented a phone line  hired a couple of handymen  and started a service we called  Circle.  And Circle offers its local membership a toll free       number that they can call on demand for any support. And people have called us for so many reasons. They've called because their pets are unwell  their DVD is broken  they've forgotten how to use their mobile phone  or maybe they are coming out of hospital and they want someone to be there. And Circle also offers a rich social calendar    knitting  darts  museum tours  hot air ballooning    you name it. But here's the interesting thing  the really deep change  over time  the friendships that have formed have begun to replace the practical offer. So let me tell you about Belinda. Belinda's a Circle member  and she was going into hospital for a hip operation  so she called her local Circle to say they wouldn't see her for a bit. And Damon  who runs the local Circle  calls her back and says   How can I help   And Belinda says   Oh no  I'm fine    Jocelyn is doing the shopping  Tony's doing the gardening  Melissa and Joe are going to come in and cook and chat.  So five Circle members had organized themselves to take care of Belinda. And Belinda's     although she says that she feels    inside  but she also says that she felt stuck and pretty down when she joined Circle. But the simple act of encouraging her to come along to that first event led to a process where natural friendships formed  friendships that today are replacing the need for expensive services. It's relationships that are making the difference. So I think that three factors have converged that enable us to put relationships at the heart and center of how we solve social problems today. Firstly  the nature of the problems    they've changed  and they require different solutions. Secondly  the cost  human as much as financial  of doing business as usual. And thirdly  technology. I've talked about the first two factors. It's technology that enables these approaches to scale and potentially now support thousands of people. So the technology we've used is really simple  it's made up of available things like databases  mobile phones. Circle has got this very simple system that underpins it  enables a small local team to support a membership of up to a thousand. And you can contrast this with a neighborhood organization of the     s  when this kind of scale just wasn't possible  neither was the quality or the longevity that the spine of technology can provide. So it's relationships underpinned by technology that can turn the Beveridge models on their heads. The Beveridge models are all about institutions with finite resources  anonymously managing access. In my work at the front line  I've seen again and again how up to    percent of resource is spent keeping people out. So professionals have to administer these increasingly complex forms of administration that are basically about stopping people accessing the service or managing the queue. And Circle  like the relational services that we and others have designed  inverts this logic. What it says is  the more people  the more relationships  the stronger the solution. So I want to tell you my third and final story  which is about unemployment. In Britain  as in most places in the world  our welfare states were primarily designed to get people into work  to educate them for this  and to keep them healthy. But here  too  the systems are failing. And so the response has been to try and make these old systems even more efficient and transactional    to speed up processing times  divide people into ever smaller categories  try and target services at them more efficiently    in other words  the very opposite of relational. But guess how most people find work today  Through word of mouth. It turns out that in Britain today  most new jobs are not advertised. So it's friends that tell you about a job  it's friends that recommend you for a job  and it's a rich and diverse social network that helps you find work. Maybe some of you here this evening are thinking   But I found my job through an advert   but if you think back  it was probably a friend that showed you the ad and then encouraged you to apply. But not surprisingly  people who perhaps most need this rich and diverse network are those who are most isolated from it. So knowing this  and also knowing about the costs and failure of current systems  we designed something new with relationships at its heart. We designed a service that encourages people to meet up  people in and out of work  to work together in structured ways and try new opportunities. And  well  it's very hard to compare the results of these new systems with the old transactional models  but it looks like  with our first       members  we outperformed existing services by a factor of three  at a fraction of the cost. And here  too  we've used technology  but not to network people in the way that a social platform would do. We've used it to bring people face to face and connect them with each other  building real relationships and supporting people to find work. At the end of his life  in       Beveridge wrote a third report. And in it he said he had made a dreadful mistake. He had left people and their communities out. And this omission  he said  led to seeing people  and people starting to see themselves  within the categories of the bureaucracies and the institutions. And human relationships were already withering. But unfortunately  this third report was much less read than Beveridge's earlier work. But today  we need to bring people and their communities back into the heart of the way we design new systems and new services  in an approach that I call  Relational Welfare.  We need to leave behind these old  transactional  unsuitable  outdated models  and we need to adopt instead the shared collective relational responses that can support a family like Ella's  that can address an issue like loneliness  that can support people into work and up the skills curve in a modern labor market  that can also address challenges of education  of health care systems  and so many more of those problems that are pressing on our societies. It is all about relationships. Relationships are the critical resource we have. Thank you. When I was a kid  my parents would tell me   You can make a mess  but you have to clean up after yourself.  So freedom came with responsibility. But my imagination would take me to all these wonderful places  where everything was possible. So I grew up in a bubble of innocence    or a bubble of ignorance  I should say  because adults would lie to us to protect us from the ugly truth. And growing up  I found out that adults make a mess  and they're not very good at cleaning up after themselves. Fast forward  I am an adult now  and I teach citizen science and invention at the Hong Kong Harbour School. And it doesn't take too long before my students walk on a beach and stumble upon piles of trash. So as good citizens  we clean up the beaches    and no  he is not drinking alcohol  and if he is  I did not give it to him. And so it's sad to say  but today more than    percent  of the oceans have plastic in them. It's a horrifying fact. And in past decades  we've been taking those big ships out and those big nets  and we collect those plastic bits that we look at under a microscope  and we sort them  and then we put this data onto a map. But that takes forever  it's very expensive  and so it's quite risky to take those big boats out. So with my students  ages six to     we've been dreaming of inventing a better way. So we've transformed our tiny Hong Kong classroom into a workshop. And so we started building this small workbench  with different heights  so even really short kids can participate. And let me tell you  kids with power tools are awesome and safe. Not really. And so  back to plastic. We collect this plastic and we grind it to the size we find it in the ocean  which is very small because it breaks down. And so this is how we work. I let the imaginations of my students run wild. And my job is to try to collect the best of each kid's idea and try to combine it into something that hopefully would work. And so we have agreed that instead of collecting plastic bits  we are going to collect only the data. So we're going to get an image of the plastic with a robot    so robots  kids get very excited. And the next thing we do    we do what we call  rapid prototyping.  We are so rapid at prototyping that the lunch is still in the lunchbox when we're hacking it. And we hack table lamps and webcams  into plumbing fixtures and we assemble that into a floating robot that will be slowly moving through water and through the plastic that we have there    and this is the image that we get in the robot. So we see the plastic pieces floating slowly through the sensor  and the computer on board will process this image  and measure the size of each particle  so we have a rough estimate of how much plastic there is in the water. So we documented this invention step by step on a website for inventors called Instructables  in the hope that somebody would make it even better. What was really cool about this project was that the students saw a local problem  and boom    they are trying to immediately address it.  I can investigate my local problem  But my students in Hong Kong are hyperconnected kids. And they watch the news  they watch the Internet  and they came across this image. This was a child  probably under     cleaning up an oil spill bare handed  in the Sundarbans  which is the world's largest mangrove forest in Bangladesh. So they were very shocked  because this is the water they drink  this is the water they bathe in  this is the water they fish in    this is the place where they live. And also you can see the water is brown  the mud is brown and oil is brown  so when everything is mixed up  it's really hard to see what's in the water. But  there's a technology that's rather simple  that's called spectrometry  that allows you see what's in the water. So we built a rough prototype of a spectrometer  and you can shine light through different substances that produce different spectrums  so that can help you identify what's in the water. So we packed this prototype of a sensor  and we shipped it to Bangladesh. So what was cool about this project was that beyond addressing a local problem  or looking at a local problem  my students used their empathy and their sense of being creative to help  remotely  other kids.  I can investigate a remote problem  So I was very compelled by doing the second experiments  and I wanted to take it even further    maybe addressing an even harder problem  and it's also closer to my heart. So I'm half Japanese and half French  and maybe you remember in      there was a massive earthquake in Japan. It was so violent that it triggered several giant waves    they are called tsunami    and those tsunami destroyed many cities on the eastern coast of Japan. More than        people died in an instant. Also  it damaged the nuclear power plant of Fukushima  the nuclear power plant just by the water. And today  I read the reports and an average of     tons are leaking from the nuclear power plant into the Pacific Ocean. And today the whole Pacific Ocean has traces of contamination of cesium    . If you go outside on the West Coast  you can measure Fukushima everywhere. But if you look at the map  it can look like most of the radioactivity has been washed away from the Japanese coast  and most of it is now    it looks like it's safe  it's blue. Well  reality is a bit more complicated than this. So I've been going to Fukushima every year since the accident  and I measure independently and with other scientists  on land  in the river    and this time we wanted to take the kids. So of course we didn't take the kids  the parents wouldn't allow that to happen. But every night we would report to  Mission Control     different masks they're wearing. It could look like they didn't take the work seriously  but they really did because they're going to have to live with radioactivity their whole life. And so what we did with them is that we'd discuss the data we collected that day  and talk about where we should be going next    strategy  itinerary  etc... And to do this  we built a very rough topographical map of the region around the nuclear power plant. And so we built the elevation map  we sprinkled pigments to represent real time data for radioactivity  and we sprayed water to simulate the rainfall. And with this we could see that the radioactive dust was washing from the top of the mountain into the river system  and leaking into the ocean. So it was a rough estimate. But with this in mind  we organized this expedition  which was the closest civilians have been to the nuclear power plant. We are sailing  .  kilometers away from the nuclear power plant  and with the help of the local fisherman  we are collecting sediment from the seabed with a custom sediment sampler we've invented and built. We pack the sediment into small bags  we then dispatch them to hundreds of small bags that we send to different universities  and we produce the map of the seabed radioactivity  especially in estuaries where the fish will reproduce  and I will hope that we will have improved the safety of the local fishermen and of your favorite sushi. You can see a progression here    we've gone from a local problem to a remote problem to a global problem. And it's been super exciting to work at these different scales  with also very simple  open source technologies. But at the same time  it's been increasingly frustrating because we have only started to measure the damage that we have done. We haven't even started to try to solve the problems. And so I wonder if we should just take a leap and try to invent better ways to do all these things. And so the classroom started to feel a little bit small  so we found an industrial site in Hong Kong  and we turned it into the largest mega space focused on social and environmental impact. It's in central Hong Kong  and it's a place we can work with wood  metal  chemistry  a bit of biology  a bit of optics  basically you can build pretty much everything there. And its a place where adults and kids can play together. It's a place where kids' dreams can come true  with the help of adults  and where adults can be kids again. Student  Acceleration  Acceleration  Cesar Harada  We're asking questions such as  can we invent the future of mobility with renewable energy  For example. Or  can we help the mobility of the aging population by transforming very standard wheelchairs into cool  electric vehicles  So plastic  oil and radioactivity are horrible  horrible legacies  but the very worst legacy that we can leave our children is lies. We can no longer afford to shield the kids from the ugly truth because we need their imagination to invent the solutions. So citizen scientists  makers  dreamers    we must prepare the next generation that cares about the environment and people  and that can actually do something about it. Thank you. Interpreter  Piano   p   is my favorite musical symbol. It means to play softly. If you're playing a musical instrument and you notice a  p  in the score  you need to play softer. Two p's    even softer. Four p's    extremely soft. This is my drawing of a p tree  which demonstrates no matter how many thousands upon thousands of p's there may be  you'll never reach complete silence. That's my current definition of silence  a very obscure sound. I'd like to share a little bit about the history of American Sign Language  ASL  plus a bit of my own background. French sign language was brought to America during the early     s  and as time went by  mixed with local signs  it evolved into the language we know today as ASL. So it has a history of about     years. I was born deaf  and I was taught to believe that sound wasn't a part of my life. And I believed it to be true. Yet  I realize now that that wasn't the case at all. Sound was very much a part of my life  really  on my mind every day. As a Deaf person living in a world of sound  it's as if I was living in a foreign country  blindly following its rules  customs  behaviors and norms without ever questioning them. So how is it that I understand sound  Well  I watch how people behave and respond to sound. You people are like my loudspeakers  and amplify sound. I learn and mirror that behavior. At the same time  I've learned that I create sound  and I've seen how people respond to me. Thus I've learned  for example ...  Don't slam the door    Don't make too much noise when you're eating from the potato chip bag    Don't burp  and when you're eating  make sure you don't scrape your utensils on the plate.  All of these things I term  sound etiquette.  Maybe I think about sound etiquette more than the average hearing person does. I'm hyper vigilant around sound. And I'm always waiting in eager nervous anticipation around sound  about what's to come next. Hence  this drawing. TBD  to be decided. TBC  to be continued. TBA  to be announced. And you notice the staff    there are no notes contained in the lines. That's because the lines already contain sound through the subtle smudges and smears. In Deaf culture  movement is equivalent to sound. This is a sign for  staff  in ASL. A typical staff contains five lines. Yet for me  signing it with my thumb sticking up like that doesn't feel natural. That's why you'll notice in my drawings  I stick to four lines on paper. In the year       I had the opportunity to travel to Berlin  Germany  for an artist residency there. Prior to this time  I had been working as a painter. During this summer  I visited different museums and gallery spaces  and as I went from one place to the next  I noticed there was no visual art there. At that time  sound was trending  and this struck me ... there was no visual art  everything was auditory. Now sound has come into my art territory. Is it going to further distance me from art  I realized that doesn't have to be the case at all. I actually know sound. I know it so well that it doesn't have to be something just experienced through the ears. It could be felt tactually  or experienced as a visual  or even as an idea. So I decided to reclaim ownership of sound and to put it into my art practice. And everything that I had been taught regarding sound  I decided to do away with and unlearn. I started creating a new body of work. And when I presented this to the art community  I was blown away with the amount of support and attention I received. I realized  sound is like money  power  control    social currency. In the back of my mind  I've always felt that sound was your thing  a hearing person's thing. And sound is so powerful that it could either disempower me and my artwork  or it could empower me. I chose to be empowered. There's a massive culture around spoken language. And just because I don't use my literal voice to communicate  in society's eyes it's as if I don't have a voice at all. So I need to work with individuals who can support me as an equal and become my voice. And that way  I'm able to maintain relevancy in society today. So at school  at work and institutions  I work with many different ASL interpreters. And their voice becomes my voice and identity. They help me to be heard. And their voices hold value and currency. Ironically  by borrowing out their voices  I'm able to maintain a temporary form of currency  kind of like taking out a loan with a very high interest rate. If I didn't continue this practice  I feel that I could just fade off into oblivion and not maintain any form of social currency. So with sound as my new art medium  I delved into the world of music. And I was surprised to see the similarities between music and ASL. For example  a musical note cannot be fully captured and expressed on paper. And the same holds true for a concept in ASL. They're both highly spatial and highly inflected    meaning that subtle changes can affect the entire meaning of both signs and sounds. I'd like to share with you a piano metaphor  to have you have a better understanding of how ASL works. So  envision a piano. ASL is broken down into many different grammatical parameters. If you assign a different parameter to each finger as you play the piano    such as facial expression  body movement  speed  hand shape and so on  as you play the piano    English is a linear language  as if one key is being pressed at a time. However  ASL is more like a chord    all    fingers need to come down simultaneously to express a clear concept or idea in ASL. If just one of those keys were to change the chord  it would create a completely different meaning. The same applies to music in regards to pitch  tone and volume. In ASL  by playing around with these different grammatical parameters  you can express different ideas. For example  take the sign TO LOOK AT. This is the sign TO LOOK AT. I'm looking at you. Staring at you. Oh    busted. Uh oh. What are you looking at  Aw  stop. I then started thinking   What if I was to look at ASL through a musical lens   If I was to create a sign and repeat it over and over  it could become like a piece of visual music. For example  this is the sign for  day   as the sun rises and sets. This is  all day.  If I was to repeat it and slow it down  visually it looks like a piece of music. All ... day. I feel the same holds true for  all night.   All night.  This is ALL NIGHT  represented in this drawing. And this led me to thinking about three different kinds of nights   last night    overnight   I feel like the third one has a lot more musicality than the other two. This represents how time is expressed in ASL and how the distance from your body can express the changes in time. For example   H is one hand   H is two hand  present tense happens closest and in front of the body  future is in front of the body and the past is to your back. So  the first example is  a long time ago.  Then  past    used to  and the last one  which is my favorite  with the very romantic and dramatic notion to it   once upon a time.   Common time  is a musical term with a specific time signature of four beats per measure. Yet when I see the word  common time   what automatically comes to mind for me is  at the same time.  So notice RH  right hand  LH  left hand. We have the staff across the head and the chest.  Head  RH  Flash claw   Common time   Chest  LH  Flash claw  I'm now going to demonstrate a hand shape called the  flash claw.  Can you please follow along with me  Everybody  hands up. Now we're going to do it in both the head and the chest  kind of like  common time  or at the same time. Yes  got it. That means  to fall in love  in International  Sign . International  Sign   as a note  is a visual tool to help communicate across cultures and sign languages around the world. The second one I'd like to demonstrate is this    please follow along with me again. And now this. This is  colonization  in ASL. Now the third    please follow along again. And again. This is  enlightenment  in ASL. So let's do all three together.  Fall in love    colonization  and  enlightenment.  Good job  everyone. Notice how all three signs are very similar  they all happen at the head and the chest  but they convey quite different meanings. So it's amazing to see how ASL is alive and thriving  just like music is. However  in this day and age  we live in a very audio centric world. And just because ASL has no sound to it  it automatically holds no social currency. We need to start thinking harder about what defines social currency and allow ASL to develop its own form of currency    without sound. And this could possibly be a step to lead to a more inclusive society. And maybe people will understand that you don't need to be deaf to learn ASL  nor do you have to be hearing to learn music. ASL is such a rich treasure that I'd like you to have the same experience. And I'd like to invite you to open your ears  to open your eyes  take part in our culture and experience our visual language. And you never know  you might just fall in love with us. Thank you. Denise Kahler Braaten  Hey  that's me. A year ago  we were invited by the Swiss Embassy in Berlin to present our art projects. We are used to invitations  but this invitation really thrilled us. The Swiss Embassy in Berlin is special. It is the only old building in the government district that was not destroyed during the Second World War  and it sits right next to the Federal Chancellery. No one is closer to Chancellor Merkel than the Swiss diplomats. The government district in Berlin also contains the Reichstag    Germany's parliament    and the Brandenburg Gate  and right next to the gate there are other embassies  in particular the US and the British Embassy. Although Germany is an advanced democracy  citizens are limited in their constitutional rights in its government district. The right of assembly and the right to demonstrate are restricted there. And this is interesting from an artistic point of view. The opportunities to exercise participation and to express oneself are always bound to a certain order and always subject to a specific regulation. With an awareness of the dependencies of these regulations  we can gain a new perspective. The given terms and conditions shape our perception  our actions and our lives. And this is crucial in another context. Over the last couple of years  we learned that from the roofs of the US and the British Embassy  the secret services have been listening to the entire district  including the mobile phone of Angela Merkel. The antennas of the British GCHQ are hidden in a white cylindrical radome  while the listening post of the American NSA is covered by radio transparent screens. But how to address these hidden and disguised forces  With my colleague  Christoph Wachter  we accepted the invitation of the Swiss Embassy. And we used this opportunity to exploit the specific situation. If people are spying on us  it stands to reason that they have to listen to what we are saying. On the roof of the Swiss Embassy  we installed a series of antennas. They weren't as sophisticated as those used by the Americans and the British. They were makeshift can antennas  not camouflaged but totally obvious and visible. The Academy of Arts joined the project  and so we built another large antenna on their rooftop  exactly between the listening posts of the NSA and the GCHQ. Never have we been observed in such detail while building an art installation. A helicopter circled over our heads with a camera registering each and every move we made  and on the roof of the US Embassy  security officers patrolled. Although the government district is governed by a strict police order  there are no specific laws relating to digital communication. Our installation was therefore perfectly legal  and the Swiss Ambassador informed Chancellor Merkel about it. We named the project  Can You Hear Me   The antennas created an open and free Wi Fi communication network in which anyone who wanted to would be able to participate using any Wi Fi enabled device without any hindrance  and be able to send messages to those listening on the frequencies that were being intercepted. Text messages  voice chat  file sharing    anything could be sent anonymously. And people did communicate. Over        messages were sent. Here are some examples.  Hello world  hello Berlin  hello NSA  hello GCHQ.   NSA Agents  Do the Right Thing  Blow the whistle    This is the NSA. In God we trust. All others we track          nonymous is watching  NSA  GCHQ   we are part of your organizations.   expect us. We will  shutdown   This is the NSA's Achilles heel. Open Networks.   Agents  what twisted story of yourself will you tell your grandchildren     NSA My neighbors are noisy. Please send a drone strike.   Make Love  Not cyberwar.  We invited the embassies and the government departments to participate in the open network  too  and to our surprise  they did. Files appeared on the network  including classified documents leaked from the parliamentary investigation commission  which highlights that the free exchange and discussion of vital information is starting to become difficult  even for members of a parliament. We also organized guided tours to experience and sound out the power constellations on site. The tours visited the restricted zones around the embassies  and we discussed the potential and the highlights of communication. If we become aware of the constellation  the terms and conditions of communication  it not only broadens our horizon  it allows us to look behind the regulations that limit our worldview  our specific social  political or aesthetic conventions. Let's look at an actual example. The fate of people living in the makeshift settlements on the outskirts of Paris is hidden and faded from view. It's a vicious circle. It's not poverty  not racism  not exclusion that are new. What is new is how these realities are hidden and how people are made invisible in an age of global and overwhelming communication and exchange. Such makeshift settlements are considered illegal  and therefore those living in them don't have a chance of making their voices heard. On the contrary  every time they appear  every time they risk becoming visible  merely gives grounds for further persecution  expulsion and suppression. What interested us was how we could come to know this hidden side. We were searching for an interface and we found one. It's not a digital interface  but a physical one  it's a hotel. We named the project  Hotel Gelem.  Together with Roma families  we created several Hotel Gelems in Europe  for example  in Freiburg in Germany  in Montreuil near Paris  and also in the Balkans. These are real hotels. People can stay there. But they aren't a commercial enterprise. They are a symbol. You can go online and ask for a personal invitation to come and live for a few days in the Hotel Gelem  in their homes  eating  working and living with the Roma families. Here  the Roma families are not the travelers  the visitors are. Here  the Roma families are not a minority  the visitors are. The point is not to make judgments  but rather to find out about the context that determines these disparate and seemingly insurmountable contradictions. In the world of globalization  the continents are drifting closer to each other. Cultures  goods and people are in permanent exchange  but at the same time  the gap between the world of the privileged and the world of the excluded is growing. We were recently in Australia. For us  it was no problem to enter the country. We have European passports  visas and air tickets. But asylum seekers who arrive by boat in Australia are deported or taken to prison. The interception of the boats and the disappearance of the people into the detention system are veiled by the Australian authorities. These procedures are declared to be secret military operations. After dramatic escapes from crisis zones and war zones  men  women and children are detained by Australia without trial  sometimes for years. During our stay  however  we managed to reach out and work with asylum seekers who were imprisoned  despite strict screening and isolation. From these contexts was born an installation in the art space of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane. On the face of it  it was a very simple installation. On the floor  a stylized compass gave the direction to each immigration detention center  accompanied by the distance and the name of the immigration facility. But the exhibition step came in the form of connectivity. Above every floor marking  there was a headset. Visitors were offered the opportunity to talk directly to a refugee who was or had been imprisoned in a specific detention facility and engage in a personal conversation. In the protected context of the art exhibition  asylum seekers felt free to talk about themselves  their story and their situation  without fear of consequences. Visitors immersed themselves in long conversations about families torn apart  about dramatic escapes from war zones  about suicide attempts  about the fate of children in detention. Emotions ran deep. Many wept. Several revisited the exhibition. It was a powerful experience. Europe is now facing a stream of migrants. The situation for the asylum seekers is made worse by contradictory policies and the temptation of militarized responses. We have also established communication systems in remote refugee centers in Switzerland and Greece. They are all about providing basic information    medical costs  legal information  guidance. But they are significant. Information on the Internet that could ensure survival along dangerous routes is being censored  and the provision of such information is becoming increasingly criminalized. This brings us back to our network and to the antennas on the roof of the Swiss Embassy in Berlin and the  Can You Hear Me   project. We should not take it for granted to be boundlessly connected. We should start making our own connections  fighting for this idea of an equal and globally interconnected world. This is essential to overcome our speechlessness and the separation provoked by rival political forces. It is only in truly exposing ourselves to the transformative power of this experience that we can overcome prejudice and exclusion. Thank you. Bruno Giussani  Thank you  Mathias. The other half of your artistic duo is also here. Christoph Wachter  come onstage. First  tell me just a detail  the name of the hotel is not a random name. Gelem means something specific in the Roma language. Mathias Jud  Yes   Gelem  Gelem  is the title of the Romani hymn  the official  and it means  I went a long way.  BG  That's just to add the detail to your talk. But you two traveled to the island of Lesbos very recently  you're just back a couple of days ago  in Greece  where thousands of refugees are arriving and have been arriving over the last few months. What did you see there and what did you do there  Christoph Wachter  Well  Lesbos is one of the Greek islands close to Turkey  and during our stay  many asylum seekers arrived by boat on overcrowded dinghies  and after landing  they were left completely on their own. They are denied many services. For example  they are not allowed to buy a bus ticket or to rent a hotel room  so many families literally sleep in the streets. And we installed networks there to allow basic communication  because I think  I believe  it's not only that we have to speak about the refugees  I think we need to start talking to them. And by doing so  we can realize that it is about human beings  about their lives and their struggle to survive. BG  And allow them to talk as well. Christoph  thank you for coming to TED. Mathias  thank you for coming to TED and sharing your story. A few years ago  I broke into my own house. I had just driven home  it was around midnight in the dead of Montreal winter  I had been visiting my friend  Jeff  across town  and the thermometer on the front porch read minus    degrees    and don't bother asking if that's Celsius or Fahrenheit  minus    is where the two scales meet    it was very cold. And as I stood on the front porch fumbling in my pockets  I found I didn't have my keys. In fact  I could see them through the window  lying on the dining room table where I had left them. So I quickly ran around and tried all the other doors and windows  and they were locked tight. I thought about calling a locksmith    at least I had my cellphone  but at midnight  it could take a while for a locksmith to show up  and it was cold. I couldn't go back to my friend Jeff's house for the night because I had an early flight to Europe the next morning  and I needed to get my passport and my suitcase. So  desperate and freezing cold  I found a large rock and I broke through the basement window  cleared out the shards of glass  I crawled through  I found a piece of cardboard and taped it up over the opening  figuring that in the morning  on the way to the airport  I could call my contractor and ask him to fix it. This was going to be expensive  but probably no more expensive than a middle of the night locksmith  so I figured  under the circumstances  I was coming out even. Now  I'm a neuroscientist by training and I know a little bit about how the brain performs under stress. It releases cortisol that raises your heart rate  it modulates adrenaline levels and it clouds your thinking. So the next morning  when I woke up on too little sleep  worrying about the hole in the window  and a mental note that I had to call my contractor  and the freezing temperatures  and the meetings I had upcoming in Europe  and  you know  with all the cortisol in my brain  my thinking was cloudy  but I didn't know it was cloudy because my thinking was cloudy. And it wasn't until I got to the airport check in counter  that I realized I didn't have my passport. So I raced home in the snow and ice     minutes  got my passport  raced back to the airport  I made it just in time  but they had given away my seat to someone else  so I got stuck in the back of the plane  next to the bathrooms  in a seat that wouldn't recline  on an eight hour flight. Well  I had a lot of time to think during those eight hours and no sleep. And I started wondering  are there things that I can do  systems that I can put into place  that will prevent bad things from happening  Or at least if bad things happen  will minimize the likelihood of it being a total catastrophe. So I started thinking about that  but my thoughts didn't crystallize until about a month later. I was having dinner with my colleague  Danny Kahneman  the Nobel Prize winner  and I somewhat embarrassedly told him about having broken my window  and  you know  forgotten my passport  and Danny shared with me that he'd been practicing something called prospective hindsight. It's something that he had gotten from the psychologist Gary Klein  who had written about it a few years before  also called the pre mortem. Now  you all know what the postmortem is. Whenever there's a disaster  a team of experts come in and they try to figure out what went wrong  right  Well  in the pre mortem  Danny explained  you look ahead and you try to figure out all the things that could go wrong  and then you try to figure out what you can do to prevent those things from happening  or to minimize the damage. So what I want to talk to you about today are some of the things we can do in the form of a pre mortem. Some of them are obvious  some of them are not so obvious. I'll start with the obvious ones. Around the home  designate a place for things that are easily lost. Now  this sounds like common sense  and it is  but there's a lot of science to back this up  based on the way our spatial memory works. There's a structure in the brain called the hippocampus  that evolved over tens of thousands of years  to keep track of the locations of important things    where the well is  where fish can be found  that stand of fruit trees  where the friendly and enemy tribes live. The hippocampus is the part of the brain that in London taxicab drivers becomes enlarged. It's the part of the brain that allows squirrels to find their nuts. And if you're wondering  somebody actually did the experiment where they cut off the olfactory sense of the squirrels  and they could still find their nuts. They weren't using smell  they were using the hippocampus  this exquisitely evolved mechanism in the brain for finding things. But it's really good for things that don't move around much  not so good for things that move around. So this is why we lose car keys and reading glasses and passports. So in the home  designate a spot for your keys    a hook by the door  maybe a decorative bowl. For your passport  a particular drawer. For your reading glasses  a particular table. If you designate a spot and you're scrupulous about it  your things will always be there when you look for them. What about travel  Take a cell phone picture of your credit cards  your driver's license  your passport  mail it to yourself so it's in the cloud. If these things are lost or stolen  you can facilitate replacement. Now these are some rather obvious things. Remember  when you're under stress  the brain releases cortisol. Cortisol is toxic  and it causes cloudy thinking. So part of the practice of the pre mortem is to recognize that under stress you're not going to be at your best  and you should put systems in place. And there's perhaps no more stressful a situation than when you're confronted with a medical decision to make. And at some point  all of us are going to be in that position  where we have to make a very important decision about the future of our medical care or that of a loved one  to help them with a decision. And so I want to talk about that. And I'm going to talk about a very particular medical condition. But this stands as a proxy for all kinds of medical decision making  and indeed for financial decision making  and social decision making    any kind of decision you have to make that would benefit from a rational assessment of the facts. So suppose you go to your doctor and the doctor says   I just got your lab work back  your cholesterol's a little high.  Now  you all know that high cholesterol is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease  heart attack  stroke. And so you're thinking having high cholesterol isn't the best thing  and so the doctor says   You know  I'd like to give you a drug that will help you lower your cholesterol  a statin.  And you've probably heard of statins  you know that they're among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world today  you probably even know people who take them. And so you're thinking   Yeah  Give me the statin.  But there's a question you should ask at this point  a statistic you should ask for that most doctors don't like talking about  and pharmaceutical companies like talking about even less. It's for the number needed to treat. Now  what is this  the NNT  It's the number of people that need to take a drug or undergo a surgery or any medical procedure before one person is helped. And you're thinking  what kind of crazy statistic is that  The number should be one. My doctor wouldn't prescribe something to me if it's not going to help. But actually  medical practice doesn't work that way. And it's not the doctor's fault  if it's anybody's fault  it's the fault of scientists like me. We haven't figured out the underlying mechanisms well enough. But GlaxoSmithKline estimates that    percent of the drugs work in only    to    percent of the people. So the number needed to treat for the most widely prescribed statin  what do you suppose it is  How many people have to take it before one person is helped     . This is according to research by research practitioners Jerome Groopman and Pamela Hartzband  independently confirmed by Bloomberg.com. I ran through the numbers myself.     people have to take the drug for a year before one heart attack  stroke or other adverse event is prevented. Now you're probably thinking   Well  OK  one in     chance of lowering my cholesterol. Why not  doc  Give me the prescription anyway.  But you should ask at this point for another statistic  and that is   Tell me about the side effects.  Right  So for this particular drug  the side effects occur in five percent of the patients. And they include terrible things    debilitating muscle and joint pain  gastrointestinal distress    but now you're thinking   Five percent  not very likely it's going to happen to me  I'll still take the drug.  But wait a minute. Remember under stress you're not thinking clearly. So think about how you're going to work through this ahead of time  so you don't have to manufacture the chain of reasoning on the spot.     people take the drug  right  One person's helped  five percent of those     have side effects  that's    people. You're    times more likely to be harmed by the drug than you are to be helped by the drug. Now  I'm not saying whether you should take the statin or not. I'm just saying you should have this conversation with your doctor. Medical ethics requires it  it's part of the principle of informed consent. You have the right to have access to this kind of information to begin the conversation about whether you want to take the risks or not. Now you might be thinking I've pulled this number out of the air for shock value  but in fact it's rather typical  this number needed to treat. For the most widely performed surgery on men over the age of     removal of the prostate for cancer  the number needed to treat is   . That's right     surgeries are done for every one person who's helped. And the side effects in that case occur in    percent of the patients. They include impotence  erectile dysfunction  urinary incontinence  rectal tearing  fecal incontinence. And if you're lucky  and you're one of the    percent who has these  they'll only last for a year or two. So the idea of the pre mortem is to think ahead of time to the questions that you might be able to ask that will push the conversation forward. You don't want to have to manufacture all of this on the spot. And you also want to think about things like quality of life. Because you have a choice oftentimes  do you I want a shorter life that's pain free  or a longer life that might have a great deal of pain towards the end  These are things to talk about and think about now  with your family and your loved ones. You might change your mind in the heat of the moment  but at least you're practiced with this kind of thinking. Remember  our brain under stress releases cortisol  and one of the things that happens at that moment is a whole bunch on systems shut down. There's an evolutionary reason for this. Face to face with a predator  you don't need your digestive system  or your libido  or your immune system  because if you're body is expending metabolism on those things and you don't react quickly  you might become the lion's lunch  and then none of those things matter. Unfortunately  one of the things that goes out the window during those times of stress is rational  logical thinking  as Danny Kahneman and his colleagues have shown. So we need to train ourselves to think ahead to these kinds of situations. I think the important point here is recognizing that all of us are flawed. We all are going to fail now and then. The idea is to think ahead to what those failures might be  to put systems in place that will help minimize the damage  or to prevent the bad things from happening in the first place. Getting back to that snowy night in Montreal  when I got back from my trip  I had my contractor install a combination lock next to the door  with a key to the front door in it  an easy to remember combination. And I have to admit  I still have piles of mail that haven't been sorted  and piles of emails that I haven't gone through. So I'm not completely organized  but I see organization as a gradual process  and I'm getting there. Thank you very much.